A Representation Framework for Cross-lingual/Interlingual
Lexical Semantic Correspondences
Yoshihiko Hayashi
Osaka University, Japan
hayashi@lang.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper proposes a framework for representing cross-lingual/interlingual lexical semantic cor-
respondences that are expected to be recovered through a series of on-demand/on-the-fly invocations
of a lexical semantic matching process. One of the central notions of the proposed framework is a
pseudo synset, which is introduced to represent a cross-lingual/multilingual lexical concept, jointly
denoted by word senses in more than one language. Another important ingredient of the proposed
framework is a framework for semantifying bilingual lexical resource entries. This is a necessary
substep when associating and representing corresponding lexical concepts in different languages
by using bilingual lexical resources. Based on these devices, this paper further discusses possible
extensions to the ISO standard lexical markup framework (LMF). These extensions would enable re-
covered correspondences to be organized as a dynamic secondary language resource, while keeping
the existing primary language resources intact.
1 Introduction
As the world goes more global, the demand for multilingual lexical semantic resources has increased. A
central approach to realize such a multilingual resource has been nicely demonstrated by the EuroWord-
Net (Vossen 2004) and the succeeding it, Global WordNet Grid project1. In these projects, the goal is to
build a worldwide grid of wordnets by means of interlingual pivots. While we may assume that the grid is
static and stable in its nature, dynamic lexical resources (Calzolari 2008) are possible, provided a variety
of language resources are wrapped as Web services2 and are accessible on a service infrastructure. For
example, a virtually combined lexicon3 can be evolutionarily realized by opportunistically associating
semantically corresponding entries in the relevant lexical resources.
However, existing frameworks for modeling and representing lexical resources are not applicable
to this new type of lexical resource in their current configurations. For example, while the ISO lexical
markup framework (LMF)4 provides useful constructs to represent a range of lexicons, it still concen-
trates on modeling one lexical resource at a time, and does not provide effective devices to integrate
different types of lexical resources into a single combined resource. This has motivated us to develop
a framework for representing cross-lingual/interlingual lexical semantic correspondences that may be
recovered through a series of on-demand/on-the-fly invocations of a lexical semantic matching process
that underlies combined lexicon access services.
The central concept of the framework is the notion of pseudo synset, which is introduced to repre-
sent a cross-lingual/multilingual lexical concept, jointly denoted by words in more than one language.
As the name implies, it inherits and extends the constituting principle of wordnets: a lexical concept is
1http://www.globalwordnet.org/gwa/gwa grid.htm
2We use the term servicize to mean the wrapping of a static language resource as a dynamic Web service, which provides a
standardized application program interface (API).
3Hartmann(2005) discusses a range of hybrid dictionaries, which includes, for example, monolingual cum interlingual
dictionary.
4Standardized as ISO 24613:2008.
155
defined as a set of synonymous word senses. Another component of the proposed framework is a frame-
work for semantifying bilingual lexical resource entries, which is a necessary substep for associating and
representing corresponding lexical concepts in different languages by using bilingual lexical resources.
This paper starts with a motivating example and a look at how to represent the abovementioned com-
ponents in the example. This paper then discusses possible extensions to the ISO LMF, which would
enable recovered cross-lingual/interlingual correspondences to be organized as a dynamic language re-
source. This dynamic resource is secondary, because it is created on top of the existing primary language
resources. Here it should be noted that this secondary language resource can be enriched and expanded,
gradually evolving in a collaborative Web service environment.
2 A Motivating Example and Representations
Figure 1 shows our motivating example, depicting five direct cross-lingual lexical semantic correspon-
dences: a Japanese word kawa can be translated into either river or stream in English; river is associated
with either of rivie`re or fleuve in French, depending on where the river flows into; stream is associated
only with rivie`re in French.


	 
	
		
 	
 
	
Figure 1: Motivating Example.
Situations similar to this one would be brought about, for example, by invoking a lexical access
service on a Web-based linguistic service infrastructure. More specifically, think of a dictionary service
that implements a virtually combined dictionary. One user of this service might like to find the meaning
of the Japanese word kawa (by consulting a Japanese lexical semantic resource) and then want to know
the equivalents in English (by consulting a bilingual dictionary); another user may want to look for
French counterparts of river. To fulfill these requirements, a computational lexical semantic matching
process behind the dictionary service should be invoked in an on-demand and on-the-fly manner, if the
relevant cross-lingual semantic correspondences are unknown to it. These invocations of the matching
process can induce possible indirect lexical semantic correspondences: for example, between kawa and
rivie`re, via river.
2.1 Problems with a Possible LMF Representation
The LMF NLP multilingual notation extension (Francopoulo et al 2009) is devised to model and repre-
sent lexical semantic correspondences across languages. We can use this device to model and represent
the situation in the motivating example, as shown in Fig. 2, which makes use of the Sense Axis
construct. Actually, this figure has been created from a figure presented in (Francopoulo et al 2009) by
adding the following: a Japanese Sense node associated with kawa; an English Sense node associated
with stream; and a Sense Axis node that links the Japanese Sense node to the two English Sense
nodes. Although this configuration seems to be natural, several questions may arise, including:
? How can we represent an indirect correspondence that could be dynamically derived or inferred
from a combination of direct correspondences? For example, should the derivable indirect corre-
spondence between kawa and fleuve also be represented by adding the Sense Axis and Sense
Axis Relation constructs? Or should we introduce another Sense Axis node, which, as
an interlingual pivot, aggregates all the corresponding senses?
156

	 










	


	

	
	

	
	 
	




Figure 2: Straightforward LMF Representation of the Motivating Example.
? How and where should the details of a matching process be encoded? This is particularly crucial
for a dynamic resource, so that the potential user is able to assess the reliability of the resource.
? Is the introduction of the Sense Axis Relation instance with the label ?more general? nec-
essary or adequate? The LMF specification states that a Sense Axis Relation instance
should be introduced if the correspondence is not direct (partially equivalent). However, in our
scenario, it is reasonable to expect that the lexical semantic relation between rivie`re and fleuve has
already been encoded somewhere in an existing French lexical semantic resource. This suggests
that the introduction of the Sense Axis Relation might be redundant.
2.2 Proposed Representation: Overview
Figure 3 shows the conceptual overview of the proposed representation for the motivating example in
consideration of these questions. In this representation, we have eight nodes, each depicted by a shaded
round rectangle node. Each of these nodes is classified as a cross-lingual pseudo synset (CP Synset)
node (marked by a number) or a multilingual pseudo synset (MP Synset) node (marked by a Greek let-
ter). While the former represents a directed cross-lingual correspondence between two senses, the latter
shows a set of multilingual word senses that may share an intersectional concept across the languages.
For example, the CP Synset node labeled ?1? represents a concept denoted by senses of kawa and
stream, along with the depicted direction. The node marked ? indicates a concept jointly denoted by the
multilingual sense set: {kawa, stream, rivie`re}.
  	







jwn ewn fwn


Figure 3: Conceptual Overview of the Proposed Representation for the Motivating Example.
Given the previously mentioned use case scenario, we presuppose that two types of lexical resources
already exist, and that they are made accessible by appropriate Web service interfaces:
? Three WordNet-type monolingual lexical semantic resources for Japanese (jwn), English (ewn)
and French (fwn) are assumed. We assume that they are modeled and represented using the LMF
NLP semantics extension.
157
? Although not explicitly depicted in this figure, two bilingual lexical resources for Japanese-to-
English (j-to-e) and English-to-French (e-to-f) are assumed. They are assumed to be mod-
eled and represented by employing the LMF machine readable dictionary (MRD) extension. How-
ever these resources would be augmented externally by the semantification mechanism described
in the next section.
As we will see later in this paper, derived correspondences between/among the existing lexical re-
source elements should be organized as a kind of secondary language resource in order to be reused.
3 Semantifying Bilingual Lexical Resource Entries
The semantification of a bilingual lexical resource entry is a necessary substep when associating possibly
corresponding lexical concepts in different languages. In principle, the source language (SL) expression
(entry word) is first associated with a sense in an SL lexical semantic resource. Then, we seek a possible
corresponding sense for the target language (TL) expression (translation equivalent) in a TL lexical
semantic resource. This process enriches the bilingual lexical resource by grounding it in the lexical
semantic resources in the SL and TL.
3.1 Necessity of Semantification
Bilingual dictionaries provide lexical items in one language with counterparts in another language that
are similar in meaning and usage. However, although this definition is fairly straightforward, bilingual
dictionaries do exhibit problems that need to be addressed, mainly owing to differences in concept for-
mation in different languages (Svense?n 2009). Although the idea of using bilingual lexical resources
to integrate semantic resources is not new, as demonstrated by Daude? (1999) or Chen (2002), bilingual
dictionaries, in general, have attracted less attention than monolingual dictionaries. As pointed out by
Fontenelle (1997), this may, in part, be owing to their less structured machine-readable data format,
making it harder for a researcher to mine useful information from bilingual resources. However, a stan-
dardized modeling framework such as the ISO LMF can enable more bilingual lexical resources to be
disseminated in a well-structured format. The LMF introduces the MRD extension to provide a meta-
model to represent monolingual/bilingual dictionaries that are primarily compiled for human use.
	

 

	
 








 
 



Figure 4: LMF MRD Class Model.
Figure 4 provides an overview of the LMF MRD extension in a UML diagram. It shows that the
translation equivalents in the TL for an entry word in the SL are represented by using Equivalent
nodes, each of which is associated with a Sense node of the Lexical Entry node. The figure
also shows that a translation equivalent is represented by an instance of Text Representation
class, which basically carries a text string that may be annotated with linguistic data categories. This
simple and somewhat unstructured configuration is reasonable and can be acceptable, given the fact
that most bilingual resources are structurally messy. However, the configuration may be insufficient if
158
we are to exploit a bilingual dictionary as a kind of semantic resource and leverage it as a bridge to
associate potentially corresponding lexical concepts in different languages. This motivated us to develop
a framework to semantify bilingual lexical resources.
3.2 Framework of Semantification
Figure 5 shows the process of semantification. It is noteworthy that before the semantification, the
bilingual lexical entry is represented according to the definition in the LMF MRD extension.


	

	
EquivalentSense
Lexical 
Entry



	

	
ewn
 
	
	
 

CP_Synset
SL_Sense_Grounding
	

e-to-f
Synset
e-to-f
 
	
	
 


 	
Figure 5: Example of Semantification of a Bilingual Dictionary Entry.
The semantification is as follows:
1. We first perform SL sense grounding to associate the Sense node in the bilingual lexical resource
e-to-f with a Sense node in the SL lexical semantic resource ewn. To accomplish this, a
computational lexical semantic matching process first looks for possibly corresponding Sense
nodes in ewn. This process5, is never decisive, even if it makes full use of the information, such
as the entry word itself, a gloss description, or additional semantic markers, provided in the lexical
resources. Therefore, a human judgment is then necessary to choose among the candidates and
establish a correspondence. Once the correspondence has been established, the formerly under-
specified word sense river.* in e-to-f is disambiguated as river.ewn.1. Here ewn.1 is
an identifier6 of the Sense node in ewn. At the same time, these two Sense nodes are interlinked
by an SL Sense Grounding node, as shown in the Fig. 5.
2. Two CP Synset nodes are then created. For example, the cross-lingual pseudo synset {river.ewn.1,
rivie`re.*} is associated with the upper CP Synset node, indicating that the intersection of
these two senses denotes a multilingual lexical concept across individual languages. However,
note that the sense rivie`re.* indicates that it is not yet grounded to a French lexical seman-
tic resource, and so the CP synset node is still underspecified. In the figure, the set marked
Closed represents the set of grounded senses, whereas the set marked Open denotes the still un-
derspecified senses. These two sets together define the current status of the multilingual pseudo
synset. It should be noted that the Sense node in the e-to-f dictionary is associated with two
CP Synset nodes. This is different from the original LMF specification, in which a Sense node
can only be associated with one Synset node. It does not matter, however, as the associations
are accomplished only externally, thereby keeping the existing LMF-modeled resource intact.
3. The additional description of the second translation equivalent ?fleuve,? which is a ?river that
flows into the sea,? is encoded as the value of the TL addition feature and is stored in the
5We are now developing the process, which basically relies on textual overlap (Banerjee and Pedersen 2003).
6A rigorous specification has not yet been determined.
159
CP synset node. As discussed in the next subsection, additional descriptions in a bilingual
lexical resource offer useful information to fill the semantic gap between an entry word and the
translation equivalents. This information includes semantic restrictions on the translation equiv-
alents, as well as collocational or phrasal equivalents that detail the semantic range of an entry
word. However, to extract the information from an additional description, we need to analyze the
presented translation equivalent appropriately. This process would be highly resource-dependent,
owning to lack of a standardized presentation format. Nevertheless, a technique to extract differ-
entia (O?hara and Wiebe 2004) can be applied, as some of the translation equivalents are given in
the so-called genus-differentia expression pattern.
4. Although it is not depicted in Fig. 5, if necessary, two underspecified TL senses, will eventu-
ally be grounded to the corresponding Sense nodes in a French lexical semantic resource. This
sub-process is called TL sense grounding and is organized in a similar way to that of SL sense
grounding, requiring a computational lexical semantic matching process with human intervention.
However it may be a more difficult process, because, in general, translation equivalents provided
in a bilingual resource are not well structured and tend to lack rich semantic descriptions.
3.3 Dealing with Partial Equivalences
The method used for creating a CP Synset node should consider the nature of the translation equiva-
lents given in a variety of bilingual resources. Translation equivalence can be classified into full equiv-
alence, partial equivalence or zero equivalence (Svense?n 2009). He points out that this classification is
rough, but important, in the sense that it may determine the way in which a translation equivalent is
presented. Among these, partial equivalence is the most noteworthy, because equivalent differentiation
has to be implemented in the dictionary description in some way, and the relevant information should
be extracted and encoded in the computational representation. The cases of partial equivalence can be
further divided into convergence (neutralization) or divergence.
The English-to-French correspondences in the motivating example can be classified as an instance
of divergence. Another example of divergence is presented by the Japanese word shujin, which, in
English, corresponds to host or hostess, depending on the gender of the person7. This example can
be represented in a similar way to Fig. 5: a CP synset node for {shujin.jwn.1, host.*},
with TL addition ?male?, and another CP synset for {shujin.jwn.1, hostess.*}, with
TL addition ?female.? These examples show that in cases of divergence, an SL sense is divided into
a set of finer-grained concepts. Generally, a divergence instance is signalled by the additional description
that specifies the sense or semantic range of a translation equivalent.
 	
	
j-to-e




	




	
	



	
jwn
 	
	
 



 


	
	
 



Figure 6: Sample Representation of Conversion-type Partial Equivalence.
Convergence can be illustrated by the example schematized in Figure 6, in which the Japanese word
ani (elder brother) and otouto (younger brother) are jointly associated with the English word brother, in
the sense of blood brother. Contrary to the divergence cases, a convergence instance may be indi-
cated by a phrasal translation equivalent that preserves, or tries to convey, the finer-grained SL meaning.
7Actually, the EDR bilingual dictionary (http://www2.nict.go.jp/r/r312/EDR/) presents: ???male?? host?
and ???female?? hostess,? respectively.
160
To encode the semantic restriction to the entry word in the SL, we introduce the SL addition feature,
as shown in Fig. 6. It should be noted that the two underspecified CP synset nodes would eventually
be grounded to the same Sense node in an English semantic resource and hence disambiguated and
converged.
4 Modeling Cross-lingual/Interlingual Correspondences for Reuse
4.1 Overall Picture
Figure 7 shows almost the entire representation of the motivating example, providing more detail than the
brief sketch shown in Fig. 3. Note that the numbered CP Synset nodes are placed at logically identical
positions to those in Fig. 3. In Fig. 7, we introduce instances of the class TL Sense Grounding
(shaded diamonds): a TL Sense Grounding node is created when the open translation equivalent
of an MP Synset node is closed by being grounded to a Synset node in the TL lexical semantic
resource. With this grounding, together with the SL Sense grounding, an entry in a bilingual lexical
resource works as a bridge from an SL lexical concept to the corresponding TL lexical concept via the
MP Synset node.



	
 	
e-to-f
	

fwn
	

TL_Sense_Grounding
 	
	

	
 	


 	

	



	


 	

	

	

ewn
	

	

jwn
 	

	



 	

	






j-to-e
Figure 7: Proposed Representation of the Motivating Example.

    
 	
	


	


	

 	
	


	


	

 	
	


	


	

Figure 8: Resulted Lattice-like Structure.
To avoid an unnecessarily complicated diagram, Fig. 8 shows an extra part of the configuration shown
in Fig. 7. In this figure, three MP Synset nodes (indicated by Greek letters) are introduced, and linked
to the associated CP Synset nodes. At the time of writing this paper, the underlying computational
process for deriving the indirect correspondences was still under investigation. However, it is however
obvious that the process has to properly filter out inappropriate transitivities to avoid the semantic drift
across languages. Again, this would need human intervention, but this may require that the person has
competence for all the relevant languages. Therefore an effective machinery to assist him/her to make
judgments will be necessary.
Incremental creation of the MP Synset nodes gradually forms a lattice-like multilingual concept
structure. This suggests that our proposed framework is similar to SIMuLLDA (Janssen 2004), which
161
applies formal concept analysis (FCA) to derive a concept lattice with the words and formal concepts.
However, our framework is clearly different in the sense that we propose an LMF-based representa-
tion framework, while considering an incremental formulation of a distributed network structure, as
discussed.
4.2 Specifications of the Proposed Constructs
All in all, we have proposed four classes in this paper: CP Synset, MP Synset, SL Sense Grounding,
and TL Sense Grounding. These classes, which could extend the current ISO LMF, are specified as
follows.
? A CP Synset node is initiated when a lexical entry in a bilingual lexical resource is activated.
? An MP Synset node is introduced when CP Synset/MP Synset nodes are combined to define
a multilingual pseudo synset.
? An instance node of the SL Sense Grounding class associates a Sense node of an existing
bilingual lexical resource entry with the corresponding Synset node in an SL lexical semantic
resource. In the original LMF, Sense-to-Synset association is direct and does not require an
intermediate node. However, the insertion of an SL Sense Grounding node is necessary to
record the detail of the lexical semantic matching process.
? An instance node of the TL Sense Grounding class associates the translation equivalent of a
bilingual lexical resource entry with the corresponding TL Synset node, closing the formerly
open translation equivalent.
Central to our framework is the CP Synset and MP Synset classes, which are similar to the LMF
Synset class in the sense that an instance of these classes represents a set of synonymous senses.
However, the CP Synset and MP Synset classes differ from the LMF Synset class, because an
instance node of the classes gathers synonymous senses across the languages. The LMF Sense Axis
class is another LMF construct that has something in common with the MP Synset class is. However,
we strongly expect that with the MP Synset class, multilingual correspondences will be incrementally
recovered and established, while also pointing to the Sense nodes in bilingual lexical resources.
4.3 Toward Reusing Recovered Correspondences
Recovered and established cross-lingual/interlingual correspondences should be made persistent some-
where on the Web-based linguistic service infrastructure, so that they can be reused. In other words, these
correspondences should be converted into a sort of secondary language resource. Just like the Sense
Axis class in the original LMF, instances of the CP Synset and MP Synset classes can be aggre-
gated in an instance of the Lexical Resource. In this way, the Lexical Resource instance can
indirectly associate the involved Lexicon instances, which are existing primary resources.
However, to make this scenario work, the following issues have to be addressed.
? All the nodes and links external to the existing language resources have to be properly stored
somewhere in the infrastructure and made retrievable. This means that standardized Web APIs
that enable the search and retrieval of the storage have to be provided.
? At the same time, relevant elements of the existing language resources, such as Synset nodes
or Sense nodes, have to be indexed and be retrievable externally. Assigning global identifiers
(URIs) to the elements may be a feasible way to do this. This may also facilitate the servicization
of language resources as exemplified in (Savas et al 2010).
162
5 Related Work
This paper discusses a framework for representing a global and distributed lexical semantic network,
while presupposing an environment in which a number of lexical resources have been Web-servicized.
Given such an environment, (Calzolari 2008) has pointed out the possibility of creating new resources
on the basis of existing resources, and some work in this direction has been published, such as Soria et
al. (2009) and Savas et al (2010). This line of work is expected to improve further and increase, as
Web-based linguistic service infrastructures evolve and gain popularity.
Obviously, another related area of research is lexicon modeling. Although the ISO LMF will un-
doubtedly be used as a solid and shared framework, requirements to its revisions/extensions continue
to emerge. Among them, Maks et al (2008) pointed out that LMF should more explicitly represent
language-dependent usage and contrasts, and they proposes a model that compromises between the MRD
extension and the multilingual extension. This solution might be reasonable, if we are to represent an
existing bilingual dictionary precisely. Nevertheless, the solution may not be sufficient to model and
represent an evolving distributed lexical semantic network, which is a prerequisite for this paper. The
problem raised up by Maks et al (2008) is closely related to the issue posed by Trippel (2010), in
which he states: LMF provides the container for combining such resources of different types, but does
not merge them into one formalism. Given this motivation, he presented a formal lexicon model called
Lexicon Graph, arguing that the lossless combination of lexical resources could be accomplished.
6 Conclusions
Presupposing a highly servicized language resources environment, this paper proposed a representation
framework for cross-lingual/interlingual lexical semantic correspondences that would be recovered in-
crementally on a Web-based linguistic service infrastructure. The main contribution of this paper is
twofold: (1) the notion of pseudo synset, which is introduced to represent pseudo lexical concepts shared
by more than one language; (2) the framework for semantifying bilingual lexical resources, which allows
bilingual lexical resources to be used as a bridge to associate lexical concepts in different languages.
This paper also discussed how the recovered correspondences can be organized as a dynamic secondary
language resource, while examining a set of possible extensions to the ISO LMF.
For future work, several items need to be pursued. First we have to extend the representation frame-
work to appropriately accommodate verb and adjective concepts, in which more complicated relation-
ships among linguistic elements have to be organized. Second, we plan to work further on the seman-
tification of bilingual lexical resources. In particular, we intend to devise a formalism and mechanism
to represent multi-word lexical entries and complicated translation equivalents. Multi-word expressions
are more frequently observed in bilingual resources compared to monolingual resources; they are useful
to describe the lexical semantic gaps between the languages. Last but not least, we intend to implement
prototype services around some existing lexical resources. To do this, along with the basic semantic
matching processes, we have to establish an effective workflow that involves human assessors to approve
the recovered cross-lingual correspondences and the inferred multilingual correspondences. In this re-
gard, the notion of a sense pool and the verification process proposed by Yu et al (2007) should be highly
relevant as a reference.
Acknowledgments
The author greatly appreciates anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful and informative comments. The
presented work supported by KAKENHI (21520401) and the Strategic Information and Communications
R&D Promotion Programme (SCOPE) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan.
163
References
[Banerjee and Pedersen 2003] Banerjee, S., and Pedersen, J. (2003). Extended Gloss Overlaps as a Mea-
sure of Semantic Relatedness. In: IJCAI 2003, pp.805?810.
[Calzolari 2008] Calzolari, N. (2008). Approaches towards a ?Lexical Web?: the Role of Interoperability.
In: ICGL2008, pp.34?42.
[Chen 2002] Chen, H.H., Lin, C.C., and Lin, W.C. (2002). Building a Chinese-English WordNet for
Translingual Application. In: ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol.1,
No.2, pp.103?122.
[Daude? 1999] Daude?, J., Padro?, L., and Rigau, G. (1999). Mapping Multilingual Hierarchies Using
Relaxation Labeling. In: EMNLP/VLC-99.
[Fontenelle 1997] Fontenelle, T. (1997). Using a Bilingual Dictionary to Create Semantic Networks. In:
International Journal of Lexicography, Vol.10, No.4, pp.275?303.
[Francopoulo et al 2009] Francopoulo, G., Bel, N. et al (2009). Multilingual Resources for NLP in
the Lexical Markup Framework (LMF). In: Language Resources and Evaluation, Vol.43, No.1, pp.
57?70.
[Hartmann 2005] Pure or Hybrid? The Development of Mixed Dictionary Genres. In: Linguistics and
Literature, Vol.3, No.2, pp.192?208.
[Janssen 2004] Janssen, M. (2004). Multilingual Lexical Databases, Lexical Gaps, and SIMuLLDA. In:
International Journal of Lexicography, Vol.17, Vol.2, pp.138?154.
[Maks et al 2008] Maks, I., Tibeius, C., and van Veenendaal R. (2008). Standardising Bilingual Lexical
Resources according to the Lexicon Markup Framework. In: LREC 2008, pp.1723?1727.
[O?hara and Wiebe 2004] O?hara, T., and Wiebe, J. (2004). Empirical Acquisition of Differentiating
Relations from Definitions. In: COLING 2004 Workshop on Enhancing and Using Electronic Dictio-
naries, pp.77?80.
[Savas et al 2010] Savas, B., Hayashi, Y., Monachini, M., Soria, C., and Calzolari, N. (2010). An LMF-
based Web Service for Accessing WordNet-type Semantic Lexicons. In: LREC2010, pp.507?513.
[Soria et al 2009] Soria, C., Monachini, M., Bertagna, F., Calzolari, N., Huan, C.R., Hsieh, S.K.,
Marchetti, A., and Tesconi, M. (2009). Exploring Interoperability of Language Resources: The Case
of Cross-Lingual Semi-automatic Enrichment of Wordnets. In: Language Resources and Evaluation,
Vol.43, pp.87?96.
[Svense?n 2009] Svense?n, B. (2009). Equivalents in Bilingual Dictionaries. In: Svense?n, B. A Handbook
of Lexicography, Cambridge University Press, pp.253?280.
[Trippel 2010] Trippel, T. (2010). Representation Formats and Models for Lexicons. In: Witt, A., and
Metzing, D. (Eds.), Linguistic Modeling of Information and Markup Languages, Springer, pp.165?
184.
[Vossen 2004] Vossen, P. (2004). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database of Autonomous and
Language-Specific Wordnets Connected via an Inter-lingual Index. In: International Journal of Lexi-
cography, Vol.17, No.2, pp.161?173.
[Yu et al 2007] Yu, L.C., Wu, C.H., Philpet, A., and Hovy, E. (2007). OntoNotes: Sense Pool Verifica-
tion Using Google N-gram and Statistical Tests. In: OntoLex 2007.
164
