Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 148?149,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Workshop on Speech & Language Processing for Assistive Technologies  
Demo Session 
 
 
 
1  ?How was School today...?? A Prototype 
System that uses a Mobile Phone to Sup-
port Personal Narrative for Children 
with Complex Communication  
Rolf Black1, Annalu Waller1, Ehud Reiter2, Nava 
Tintarev2, Joseph Reddington2  
(1University of Dundee, 2University of Aberdeen) 
We will show a sensor based mobile phone proto-
type that supports personal narrative for children 
with complex communication needs. We will 
demonstrate how the phone is used to capture 
voice recordings and information about location, 
people and objects using RFID tags and QR stick-
ers. The challenging environment of a special 
school for prototype testing will be discussed using 
real life experiences. 
 
2 The PhonicStick: Interactive access to 
sounds for people with Complex Com-
munication Needs 
Ha Trinh, Annalu Waller, Rolf Black,  
James Bennet 
(University of Dundee) 
The PhonicStick is a new sound-based speech ge-
nerating device which enables nonspeaking indi-
viduals to access 42 English sounds and blend 
sounds into spoken words. The device can poten-
tially be used both as a literacy learning tool and an 
interactive communication aid for people with 
literacy difficulties. We will discuss how NLP 
technologies, such as speech synthesis and predic-
tive techniques, are utilised to improve the usabili-
ty of the device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 Toby Churchill Ltd 
David Mason1, James Bennet2 
(1TLC, 2University of Dundee) 
Lightwriter? SL40.  We will show one of the new 
SL40 Connect mobile phone enabled Lightwri-
ters?. Lightwriters? are portable text-to-speech 
devices with dual displays, one facing the user and 
a second out-facing display allowing natural face-
to-face communication. They are operated by key-
board and use a fast prediction system based on the 
user?s own vocabulary. A certain degree of literacy 
is required to operate a Lightwriter?. 
Lightwriter? SL40 with PhonicStick. We will 
show an SL40 development unit that is running a 
version of Dundee University?s PhonicStick soft-
ware.  This project is an ongoing collaboration 
with the Assistive and Healthcare Technologies 
group in the School of Computing at Dundee.   
VIVOCA. We will be describing a project with 
partners including the University of Sheffield and 
the Assistive Technology team at Barnsley District 
General Hospital. The project is developing and 
evaluating a novel device for supporting the com-
munication needs of people with severe speech 
impairment that will address the limitations of the 
current technology.  It builds on previous work by 
this team (funded by Neat) which has established 
user requirements and identified the technical de-
velopments required.  The device, a Voice Input 
Voice Output Communication Aid (or VIVOCA) 
will take as input the unintelligible disordered 
speech of the users. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148
4 SceneTalker: An Utterance-Based AAC 
System Prototype 
Timothy Walsh1, Jan Bedrosian2, Linda Hoag3, 
Kathleen F. McCoy1 
(1University of Delaware; 2Western Michigan Uni-
versity, 3Kansas State University) 
SceneTalker is a prototype utterance-based aug-
mentative and alternative communication system 
that uses scripts (and scenes within scripts) to or-
ganize prestored messages for highly routine goal-
oriented public situations (such as going to a res-
taurant). Many aspects of the system design are 
inspired by a series of experiments on using pres-
tored utterances in public goal-oriented situations 
when the prestored message did not exactly match 
what the user wanted to say. In addition to the 
script structures, we show system messages that 
are not anticipated to be perfect/complete for what 
is needed and strategies of use with stored messag-
es that anticipate the communication partner?s 
follow-up to utterances (adjacency pairs). 
5 SIGHT System 
Charles Greenbacker1, Seniz Demir3, Peng Wu1, 
Sandra Carberry1, Stephanie Elzer2, Kathleen F. 
McCoy1  
(1University of Delaware; 2Millersville University, 
4T?bitak Bilgem, Turkey) 
The SIGHT system is intended to give people with 
visual impairments access to information graphics 
(e.g., bar charts) found in popular media. The sys-
tem generates a textual summary that provides the 
chart?s overall intended message and additional 
salient propositions conveyed by the graphic. 
 
149
