Recognizing Confinement in Web Texts
Megumi Ohki?
Suguru Matsuyoshi?
Junta Mizuno?
Kentaro Inui?
Nara Insutitute of Science and Technology?
Eric Nichols?
Koji Murakami??
Shouko Masuda?
Yuji Matsumoto?
Tohoku University?
{megumi-o,shouko,matuyosi,matsu}@is.naist.jp
{eric,junta-m,inui}@tohoku.ac.jp
koji.murakami@mail.rakuten.co.jp
Abstract
In the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) task, sentence pairs are classified into one of three se-
mantic relations: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION or UNKNOWN. While we find some sentence pairs
hold full entailments or contradictions, there are a number of pairs that partially entail or contradict one
another depending on a specific situation. These partial contradiction sentence pairs contain useful infor-
mation for opinion mining and other such tasks, but it is difficult for Internet users to access this knowledge
because current frameworks do not differentiate between full contradictions and partial contradictions. In
this paper, under current approaches to semantic relation recognition, we define a new semantic relation
known as CONFINEMENT in order to recognize this useful information. This information is classified as
either CONTRADICTION or ENTAILMENT. We provide a series of semantic templates to recognize CON-
FINEMENT relations in Web texts, and then implement a system for recognizing CONFINEMENT between
sentence pairs. We show that our proposed system can obtains a F-score of 61% for recognizing CON-
FINEMENT in Japanese-language Web texts, and it outperforms a baseline which does not use a manually
compiled list of lexico-syntactic patterns to instantiate the semantic templates.
1 Introduction
On the Internet, there are various kinds of documents, and they often include conflicting opinions or
differing information on a single topic. Collecting and organizing this diverse information is an important
part of multi-document summarization.
When searching with a particular query on the Internet, we want information that tells us what other
people think about the query: e.g. do they believe it is true or not; what are the necessary conditions
for it to apply. For example, consider the hypothetical search results for the query given in (1). You get
opinion (2a), which supports the query, and opinion (2b) which opposes it.
(1) Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
(2) a. Xylitol can prevent tooth decay.
b. Xylitol is not effective at all at preventing tooth decay.
A major task in the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) Challenge (Giampiccolo et al (2007)) is
classifying the semantic relation between a Text and a Hypothesis into ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION,
or UNKNOWN. Murakami et al (2009) report on the STATEMENT MAP project, the goal of which is
to help Internet users evaluate the credibility of information sources by analyzing supporting evidence
from a variety of viewpoints on their topics of interest and presenting them to users together with the
supporting evidence in a way that makes it clear how they are related. A variety of techniques have been
successfully employed in the RTE Challenge in order to recognize instances of textual entailment.
?Current afflication: Rakuten Institute of Technology
215
However, as far as we know, there have been no studies on recognizing sentences which specify condi-
tions under which a query applies, despite the fact that these relations are useful information for Internet
users. Such useful sentences are plentiful on the Web. Consider the following examples of CONTRA-
DICTION and ENTAILMENT.
(3) a. Xylitol can not prevent tooth decay if it not at least 50%.
b. The effect of Xylitol on preventing tooth decay is limited.
In example (3a), the necessary condition to prevent tooth decay by Xylitol is ?it contains at least fifty
percent Xylitol?. That condition is expressed by the phrase in bold in (3a). This sentence informs users
that if they want to prevent tooth decay, the products they use must contain a certain amount of Xylitol to
be effective. In example (3b), we obtain information on uncertainty of Xylitol?s tooth decay prevention
effectiveness from the phrase ?is limited?. It tells that Xylitol is not necessarily effective at preventing
tooth decay, and thus it is not completely in agreement with or contradiction to the original sentence (1).
It is important to recognize the semantic relation shown in (3) because it provides more specific infor-
mation about the query or specifies the conditions under which the statement holds or does not. This is
valuable information for Internet users and needs to be distinguished from fully contradicting or agreeing
opinions.
We call this semantic relation CONFINEMENT because it confines the situation under which a query
applies. In this paper, we give a language independent definition of the CONFINEMENT relation in pred-
icate logic and provide a framework for detecting the relation through a series of semantic templates that
take logical and semantic features as input. We implement a system that detects CONFINEMENT rela-
tions between sentence pairs in Japanese by instantiating the semantic templates using rules and a list of
lexico-semantic patterns. Finally, we conduct empirical evaluation of recognition of the CONFINEMENT
relation between queries and sentences in Japanese-language Web texts.
2 Related Work
In RTE research, only three types of relations are defined: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION, and
UNKNOWN. RTE is an important task and has been the target of much research (Szpektor et al (2007);
Sammons et al (2009)). However, none of the previous research has introduced relations corresponding
to CONFINEMENT.
Cross-document Structure Theory (CST, Radev (2000)) is another approach to recognizing semantic
relations between sentences. CST is an extended rhetorical structure analysis based on Rhetorical Struc-
ture Theory (RST). It attempts to describe the semantic relations between two or more sentences from
different source documents that are related to the same topic. It defines 18 kinds of semantic relations
between sentences. Etoh and Okumura (2005) constructed a Japanese Cross-document Relation Corpus
and defined 14 kinds of semantic relations. It is difficult to consider CONFINEMENT relations in the
CST categorical semantic relations because it focuses on comparing sentences in terms of equivalence
and difference between sentences. At first glance, CONFINEMENT may seem to be defined in terms of
difference between sentences, but this approach does not capture the idea of restriction on a sentence?s
applicability. Thus, it is beyond the scope of CST.
In the field of linguistics, Nakagawa and Mori (1995) discussed restrictions as represented in the
four Japanese subordinate clause patterns. Abe (1996) researched the role of quantifiers in quantitative
restrictions and the role of ??? (only).? There is much other researches on expressions representing
?confinement? in a sentence in linguistics. These expressions are useful in order to recognize phrases
which contradict each other. However, as far as we know, there is no research on the relation of CON-
FINEMENT between two sentences in the linguistics literature. The absence of related research makes
defining and recognizing CONFINEMENT a very challenging task.
3 The CONFINEMENT Relation
We present the definition of the CONFINEMENT relation and describe its differences from ENTAIL-
MENT and CONTRADICTION. In essence, a pair of sentences is in the CONFINEMENT relation if either
the premise or consequent of the second sentence has a certain condition or restriction, and without such
condition or restriction the pair is equivalent to either ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION.
216
Consider an example of CONFINEMENT setence pair: (2a) and (3a). The statement ?it (Xylitol) is not at
least 50%? is a condition of the statement ?Xylitol can not prevent tooth decay.? It is a CONTRADICTION
if the conditional statement is satisfied. Because the truth value of the whole statement depends on
various conditions to be satisfied, it is important to properly define a framework to define them.
3.1 A Logical Definition of CONFINEMENT
We present a definition of CONFINEMENT in predicate logic. We define CONFINEMENT as a semantic
relation between two sentences, where the first sentence corresponds to RTE?s Hypothesis, or the user
Query, and the second sentence corresponds to RTE?s Text that has some semantic relation with the
Query, which we want to identify.
Here we consider sentence pairs where the Query matches the logical pattern ?x(P (x) ? C(x)),
where we call P (x) the Premise and C(x) the Consequence. There are many ways of representing
sentences as logical expressions, and we think that the logical pattern (?(P (x) ? C(x))) can cover a
variety of queries. For example, the sentence ?Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.? can be
represented as ?x(isXylitol(x) ? effectiveAtPreventingToothDecay(x)). Consider the case where one
sentence contains only a Consequence. This case can be regarded as a special case of the above formula.
We write such a sentence as ?x(T ? C(x)) showing that the Premise is always True.
In this paper, we limit discussion of the CONFINEMENT relation to the Query matching to the above
logical pattern. Recognizing CONFINEMENT between the Text and the Query having more complex
semantic patterns is an area of future work. Here, we split the definition of CONFINEMENT into subtypes
according to: (i) conditions to satisfy in addition to the Premise, and (ii) limitations on the degree of the
Consequence.
Premise side Additional conditions for achieving the Consequence
Explicit constraint
Some conditional sentences use an expression correspoinding to logical ?only if,? which explicitly
means two way conditions as the following formula.
?x((P (x) ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? C(x)) (1)
?(P (x) ? ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? ?C(x)))
For example, S1 in Table 1, ?Xylitol is effective at preventing cavities only when it is 100%?,
explicitly specify that Xylitol is effective if it is 100% and is not effective if it is not 100%. So,
we assume the form of the above formula for this type of statement.
Implicit constraint
This type of sentence specifies an additional condition on the Premise and is represented by the
following formula. The Premise needs to be satisfied for the consequence to be achieved.
?x((P (x) ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? C(x)) (2)
Example S5 in Table 1 says ?Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is 100%?, which
is assumed by Formula (2). S5 does not contain an expression such as ?only (??)?, which
explicitly specifies that C(x) does not hold when an additional condition is not satisfied. One may
understand that it implicitly means ?Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not
100%,? but S5 does not structly require this.
Consequence side Constraints on the degree of achieving the Consequence
There are sentences in partial entailment or contradiction where the degree of achieving of the Con-
sequence is limited. To represent these limitations on the Consequence side, we define a CONFINE-
MENT relation where the degrees of the Consequence are limited as in Example (3b). We define the
following formula to represent these limitations on the Consequence side.
?x((P (x) ? Cr(x)) (3)
Cr(x) represents C(x) with additional restriction. For example, S3 in Table 1 says that Xylitol is
somewhat effective at preventing tooth decay, which means that there are cases in which Xylitol can
not prevent tooth decay. In the case of S3, Cr(x) is ?is a bit effective?. This type of CONFINE-
MENT provides valuable information about Xylitol?s limited ability to promote dental hygiene in S3.
217
All CONFINEMENTs on the Consequence side are of type EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT, because they
explicitly mean that a part of the Consequence is achieved but no other parts are achieved.
3.2 Semantic Templates
We propose a series of semantic templates to classify sentence pairs into one of the CONFINEMENT
relation subtypes we define. The semantic templates take a set of features as input and use their values
to categorize the sentence pair. In Section 4, we evaluate the coverage of the semantic templates by
classifying a small set of sentence pairs using manually set feature values. In Section 6, we provide
more realistic evaluation by using a proposed system to set the feature values automatically and classify
sentence pairs as ENTAILMENT / CONTRADICTION, or CONFINEMENT.
We assume that each sentence consists of a Premise and Consequence, and that each sentence pair
which has a CONFINEMENT relation contains at least one additional condition or one additional limitation
as defined in Section 3.1.
We know that there are a variety of expressions that indicate the presence of a CONFINEMENT relation.
For example, both ?Only 100% pure Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.? and ?Xylitol is not
effective at preventing tooth decay unless it is 100% pure.? are CONFINEMENTs of ?Xylitol is effective
at preventing tooth decay.? Since it is impossible to handle all possible expressions that indicate CON-
FINEMENT, we focus on covering as many as possible with three features: (1) the type of constraint, (2)
the type of Premise, and (3) the type of Consequence. The features are defined in more detail below.
IF-Constraint This feature indicates the type of logical constraint in the Text sentence. Its values can
be ?IF,? ?ONLY-IF.?
Premise This feature indicates the type of Premise in the Text sentence. The value ?P+A? or ?notP+A?
means there is an Additional Condition on the Premise. The value ?P? or ?notP? means there is just
a Premise. ?not? represents the Premise have a negation.
Consequence This feature indicates the type of Consequence. Its possible values are ?C? (just a Conse-
quence), ?notC? (negated Consequence), ?Cr? or ?notCr? (certain partial Consequence).
Semantic templates consist of a tuple of four feature values and a mapping to the confinement type they
indicate. A full list of templates is given in Table 1. In the templates, a wildcard asterisk ?*? indicates
that any feature value can match in that slot of the template. The abbreviations ENT, CONT and CONF
stand for ENTAILMENT, CONFINEMENT and CONFINEMENT respectively.
Semantic templates are applied in turn from top pattern by determining the value of each feature and
looking up the corresponding relation type in Table 1. We give a classification examples below. The user
query is sentence S0. Sentences S1 are Web texts.
Query : S0. Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
Text [ONLY-IF P(x) ? AC(x) then C(x) ]: S1. Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay when you
take it every day without fail.
In Example, IF-Constraint is ?ONLY-IF?, Premise is ?P+A?, and the type of Consequence is ?C?.
This instance has an additional condition and the Consequence matches the Query, so it is identified as
an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT.
4 Verifying Semantic Templates
In this section, we verify the effectiveness of semantic templates in recognizing CONFINEMENT rela-
tions by testing them on real-world data in Japanese. To directly evaluate the quality of the templates,
we construct a small data set of sentence pairs and manually annotate them with the correct values for
each of the features defined in Section 3.2.
4.1 Data
We constructed the Development set and the Open-test set of sample Japanese user queries and Inter-
net text pairs following the methodology of Murakami et al (2009). However, Murakami et al (2009)
annotated Query-Text pairs with coarse-grained AGREEMENT and CONFLICT relations that subsume the
218
Table 1: Semantic templates for recognizing CONFINEMENT
Semantic features Relation Number of Number of Example
IF-constraint Premise Consequence positive negative S0:?????????????????.
example example Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
ONLY-IF P+A * EXPLICIT 8 0 S1:??????? 100%?????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is 100%.
ONLY-IF notP+A * EXPLICIT 0 0 S2:??????? 50%??????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not under 50%.
* * Cr EXPLICIT 11 0 S3:??????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is a bit effective at preventing tooth decay.
* * notCr EXPLICIT 12 0 S4:????????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is not almost of effective at preventing tooth decay.
IF P+A * IMPLICT 62 0 S5:??????? 100%???????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is 100%.
IF notP+A * IMPLICIT 1 0 S6:??????? 100%???????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not 100%
IF P C ENT 279 0 S7:???????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is eaten.
IF notP C CONT 0 0 S8:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not eaten.
IF P notC CONT 13 0 S9:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is eaten.
IF notP notC ENT 0 0 S10:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not eaten.
ONLY-IF P C ENT 3 0 S11:??????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is eaten.
ONLY-IF notP C CONT 0 0 S12:?????????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not eaten.
ONLY-IF P notC CONT 0 0 S13:??????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is eaten.
ONLY-IF notP notC ENT 0 0 S14:?????????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not eaten.
Table 2: Data set (Counts of sentences out of parenthesis and statements in parentheses)
Entailment Contradiction Confinement All
Development 258 (282) 8 (13) 79 (94) 345 (389)
Open-test 230 170 200 600
RTE relations of ENTAILMENT and CONTRADICTION. As our task is to discriminate between CON-
FINEMENT and RTE relations, we annotate each sentence pair or each statement1 pair with one of the
following relations instead: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION, or CONFINEMENT. In the case of CON-
FINEMENT, we annotate Query-Text pairs which are not full ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION but
these Text partially agrees and disagrees with the Query. Annotations were checked by two native speak-
ers of Japanese, and any sentence pair where annotation agreement is not reached was discarded. Table
2 shows that how many sentences or statements are in each data set. Annotated statements counts are
written in parentheses. We use the Development set for evaluation of verifying semantic templates and
develop list of lexical and syntactic patterns for semantic features extraction, and the Open-test set for
evaluation in Section 6.
4.2 Verification Result
After the data was prepared, we annotated it with the correct feature values for use with the semantic
templates. This was done by manually checking for words or phrases in the sentences that indicated one
of the features in Table 1. Once the features were set, we used them to classify each sentence pair.
We give the numbers of instances that we could confirm for each pattern in the sixth column of Table
1 and the numbers of negative instances in the seventh column, which satisfy semantic template but does
not agree Relation values in the fifth column. As a result we find that there were no statement pairs that
could not be successfully classified. We grasp CONFINEMENT relation with semantic templates for the
most part. This verification data does not cover all combinations of patterns in our semantic templates, so
we can not rule out the possibility of existence of an exception that cannot be classified by the semantic
templates. However, we find these results to be an encouraging indication of the usefulness of semantic
templates. Here are some example classifications found in the verification data.
Coordinate clauses Combining multiple of IMPLICIT CONFINEMENTs results in an EXPLICIT CON-
FINEMENT relation
(4)S0. ????????????.
Steroid has side-effects.
S1. ???????????????????????????????????????
1Murakami et al define a ?statement? as the smallest unit that can convey a complete thought or viewpoint. In practice, this
can be a sentence or something smaller such as a clause.
219
???????????????????.
Long-term use of steroid causes side-effects, but there is no need to worry about side-effects
in short-term usage.
In Example (4), S1 is an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0. This is derived from the combination of
CONFINEMENT of the two coordinate clauses of S1: the former phrase ?Long-term use of steroid causes
side-effects? of S1 is an IMPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0 by our semantic templates and the latter phrase
is an IMPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0.
Additional information for whole Query Combining of a CONTRADICTION and an IMPLICIT CON-
FINEMENT result in an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT
(5)S0. ????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
S1. ??????????????????????,???????????????????????????????????????.
Tooth decay can not be prevented with Xylitol alone, but it can be fundamentally prevented
with an appropriate diet and by taking Xylitol after every meal.
The first clause before the comma in S1 of Example (5) corresponds to the entire sentence of S0. The
second clause after the comma helps us recognize that it is a CONFINEMENT relation. This instance
is also a combination of semantic templates, so we need to recognize negation of each statement and
adversative conjunction but we do not need to add new features to Table 1.
5 Proposed System
We propose a system which uses semantic templates for recognizing CONFINEMENT consists of six
steps: (I) linguistic analysis, (II) structural alignment, (III) Premise and Consequence identification,
(IV) semantic feature extraction, (V) adversative conjunction identification, and (VI) semantic template
application. Figure 1 shows the work flow of the system. This system takes as input corresponding to S0
and S1, and return a semantic relation.
5.1 I. Linguistic Analysis
In linguistic analysis, we conduct word segmentation, POS tagging, dependency parsing, and extended
modality analysis. This linguistic analysis acts as the basis for alignment and semantic feature extrac-
tion. For syntactic analysis, we identify words and POS tags with the Japanese morphological analyser
Mecab2, and we use the Japanese dependency parser CaboCha (Kudo and Matsumoto (2002)) to pro-
duce dependency trees. We also conduct extended modality analysis using the resources provided by
Matsuyoshi et al (2010).
5.2 II. Structural Alignment
To identify the consequence of S0 in S1, we use Structural Alignment (Mizuno et al (2010)). In Struc-
tural Alignment, dependency parent-child links are aligned across sentences using a variety of resources
to ensure semantic relatedness.
5.3 III. Premise and Consequence identification
In this step, we identify the Premise and the Consequence in S1. When a sentence pair satisfies all
items is satisfying, we can identify a focused chunk as the Consequence in S1:
1. A chunk?s modality in S0 is assertion, this chunk is the Consequence in S0
2. A chunk in S1 align with the Consequence in S0
We identify the Premise in S1 when a sentence pair satisfies first, and either second or third item of
the following conditions:
1. A case particle of chunks in S0 is either ?? (agent marker)? or ?? (topic marker)? and these chunks
are children of the Consequence in S0?s dependency tree
2. The subject in S0 aligns with the subject of S1
3. All of the dependants of the expression ??? (to, for)? have alignments in S0 dependency tree
2http://chasen.org/taku/ software/mecab/.
220
Figure 1: An overview of a proposal system to recognize CONFINEMENT
5.4 IV. Semantic Feature Extraction
We extract features for the semantic templates using a list of lexical and syntactic patterns. These
patterns were manually compiled using the development data set introduced in Section 4. Features for
the semantic templates are then automatically extracted by applying these patterns to input sentence
pairs. The following overviews our extraction approach for each feature.
5.4.1 IF-Constraint Feature Extraction
Using CaboCha, we manually constructed lists of words and their POS that are indicators of the
semantic condition under which a Premise occurs. We extract as features any words in the input sentences
that appear in the list with the corresponding POS. The ?IF? lexical type lists conjunctions that are the
results of a conditional chunk or noun phrases that indicate a case or situation. The ?ONLY-IF? lexical
type is used to represent the most constraining situations. The following is our list of expressions.
? IF: ?? (in case),?/??/? (when),?/??/?? (if),? (with)
? ONLY-IF: ??/??? (for this time), ??/??/?? (only), ??? (for the first time), ?? (to,
for)
5.4.2 Premise Feature Extraction
We treat the words or phrases which are extracted from the constraint as conditions, and need to decide
whether a given condition is the Premise or an additional condition for the Premise. The Premise is set
to ?P? when first step and either the second or third step of the following conditions are satisfied, and it
is set to ?P+A? otherwise:
1. ? The condition have children in the S1?s dependency tree or the condition?s children are not aligned
to chunks in S0
2. ? The condition?s parent in S0?s dependency tree has any chunk with a child aligned with the Conse-
quence in S0, or the condition?s parent is not aligned with chunks in S0
3. ? The condition?s parent does not have any expression with the meaning of ?use? in the S0?s depen-
dency tree
When these step are satisfied and negation exists in conditional chunks, Premise is set to ?notP+A,? if
these step are not satisfied, Premise is set to ?notP.? In the third step, we identify expressions with the
meaning of ?use? with our lexical list. For example ?? (use), ??? (eat), ?? (take) and so on. If
the condition?s parent has words in our lexical list, we identify that ?Xylitol? and ?eating Xylitol? and
?using Xylitol? are equivalent.
5.4.3 Consequence Feature Extraction
This feature is used to indicate the semantic relationship between Consequences of the sentences pair.
Sentences with Consequences that share a certain amount of similarity in polarity and syntax are judged
to have ENTAILMENT, otherwise they are in CONTRADICTION. In order to be judged as ENTAILMENT,
the following conditions must all be true:
1. The modality of the Consequences must be identical.
2. The polarity of the Consequences must be identical as indicated by the resources in (Sumida et al
(2008))
3. The Premises of both sentences must align with each other
221
4. ? The sentences must not contain expressions that limit range or degree such as ????? (almost)?
or ??? (degree)?
When all item are satisfied, the Consequence is set to ?C?, otherwise it is set to ?notC.? We identify
whether the consequence has expressions which limit the degree or not. The Consequence is set to ?Cr?
or ?notCr? when the following all conditions is satisfied:
1. Any of the children of the Consequence align with a chunk in S0?s dependency tree.
2. ? There are expressions limiting the degree of the Consequence or the siblings in S1?s dependency
tree
When this two steps are satisfied and the all four steps to judge whether sentence pairs is ENTAILMENT
or not are not satisfied, Consequence is set to ?notCr.?
5.5 V. Adversative Conjunction Identification
We manually compiled a list of target expressions including conjunctions such as ?? (but).? When a
S1 chunk containing an adversative conjunction that aligns with the Premise of S0 or the S0?s Premise
depends on S1 chunk containing an adversative conjunction, we set each feature set in a chunk before an
adversative conjunction and after an adversative conjunction to semantic templates.
5.6 VI. Semantic Template Application
We apply semantic feature extracted in Step IV to semantic templates. If S1 matches multiple semantic
templates with an adversative conjunction from Step V, we combine the semantic templates. We get a
relation for a sentence pair in this step.
5.7 Example of Semantic Features Extraction
Feature extraction is illustrated in greater detail in the examples S0 which is the query and S1 in
Table 1. First, we identify words represented IF-Constraint is ?ONLY-IF?: ?? (when)? is in S1 and the
conditional chunk has a word ??? (only).? Next, we evaluate each the type of Premise of each chunk to
determine if it is a premise or an additional condition. The subject word ?Xylitol? align between S0 and
S1, and the conditional chunk?s sibling in dependency tree of S1 is a chunk which has the subject. And
the conditional chunk have a child which is not aligned any chunk in S0, it is ?100%? (100%).? And the
conditional chunk has no negations. So, Premise is set to ?P+A.? Finally, we check if the consequences
to the conditions are aligned to the verbs and nouns indicating consequences in S0: ?prevent? and ?is
effective? are aligned, the modality and polarity of the Consequence are identical, these depended on by
the condition, and the Consequence has no expressions which limited range or degree. Consequence is
set to ?C.?We set the semantic template features and get a result which the sentences relation is EXPLICIT
CONFINEMENT. Ideally patterns for setting semantic feature for semantic templates should be learned
automatically, but this remains an area of future work. Nonetheless, our current experiment gives a good
measure of the effectiveness of semantic templates in recognizing CONFINEMENT relations.
6 Evaluation
In Section 4, we verified that the semantic templates defined in Section 3.2 can successfully classify
semantic relations as CONFINEMENT given the correct feature values. In this Section, we present the
results of an experiment in a more realistic setting by using semantic templates together with the features
automatically extracted as described with our proposed system in Section 5 to determine whether or not
a sentence pair has a CONFINEMENT relation.
6.1 Setting up Evaluation
While more research on recognizing ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION between sentences pairs is
necessary, it is important to recognize new relations that cannot be analysed in existing frameworks in
order to provide Internet users with the information they need. Thus, We assume that unrelated sentence
pairs will be discarded before classification, in this experiment we focus only on the recognition of
CONFINEMENT relations. So our goal in this experiment is to classify between CONFINEMENT and NOT
CONFINEMENT. We will evaluate determining whether CONFINEMENT sentence pairs are Explicit or
Implicit in future. In our experiment, we used a gold data for structural alignment to evaluate semantic
feature extraction.
222
Table 3: Results of recognizing confinement relations with our proposal system
Recall Precision F-Score
proposed system 0.65(129/200) 0.57(129/225) 0.61
baseline system 0.96(192/200) 0.34(192/562) 0.50
Table 4: Instances of incorrect classification
S0 S1
A ???????????????. ??????????????????????????????.
False A person can regain their health with isoflavon. Excess intake of isoflavon to boost its health effects is prohibited.
Negative B ?????????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.
Xylitol has effects on preventing tooth decay. The use of xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay when done while eating properly and brushing one?s
teeth regularly.
C ????????????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????.
Xylitol can prevent tooth decay. It is a big mistake to think that one can prevent tooth decay if they put Xylitol in ? their mouth.
False D ??????????????. ???????????????????????????.
Positive Steroids can cure illnesses. Atrophic dermatitis will heal completely if steroid use is stopped.
E ???????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????????????.
Side effects are a worry for steroids. The amount of steroids or period of time that causes side effects differs from person to person.
6.2 Baseline System
We developed a baseline system that does not use our manually-compiled lexico-syntactic patterns
in order to act as a point of comparison for the proposed system in evaluating their contribution to
CONFINEMENT recognition.
The baseline system consists of performing all of the steps from of our proposed system that do not
rely on manually compiled lexico-syntactic patterns. Step relying on these resources are marked with a
? in Section 5 and are skipped in the baseline. Essentially, we conduct Steps I, II, and III, the parts of
Step IV that can be done without manually-compiled patterns, and, finally, Step VI.
In Step IV, we determine if there are any limitations on the Consequence in the Consequence Feature
subset, but we do not judge whether the Consequence is ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION in the
baseline system.
6.3 Result and Error Analysis
The results are given in Table 3. We find that our system has much higher precision than the baseline,
improving by over 20%. In our system, the list of semantic patterns is effective at recognizing CON-
FINEMENT. On the other hand recall has gone down compared to the baseline. The baseline judged that
almost sentences are CONFINEMENT, so the list of semantic patterns employed in our rule-based system
is useful at eliminating false positives. Table 4 shows some instances of incorrect classification. Each
instance is a pair (S0, S1).
Example A-S1 means ?Excess intake of isoflavon can not boost one?s health? and ?excess intake? is
an additional condition for A-S1. In this case ?excess? is a lexical specifier of the specific condition and
is indicated by the particle ???. The particle ?? (topic marker)? is not currently used as a feature in the
semantic templates since it is very noisy, so this instance can not be detected. We need to expand our
method of acquiring semantic patterns to better handle such cases.
The additional condition phrase in Example B-S1 modifies ?The use of Xylitol? instead of ?is effective
at preventing tooth decay?, preventing us from properly recognizing the limiting condition in this case.
We need to conduct deeper scopal analysis to determine when the modifier of an embedded chunk should
be considered as an additional condition.
Example C-S1 is an instance where the system fails to recognize that ?put in their mouth? is an expres-
sion meaning ?use? since our lists of lexical words for features did not have it. We should increase our
ability to recognize synonyms of ?to use? by automatically mining data for paraphrases or approaching
it as a machine learning task in order to handle examples like C-S1. On the other hands ?if steroid use
is stopped? in example D-S1 is the premise which should indicate an IF condition and Negation exists,
however we can not recognize it correctly since the phrase lacks negation. We will make a list of words
and phrases that are antonyms of ?use? in order to recognize such instances.
The condition in example E-S1 is about how side-effects appear, and not a condition for the other
sentence example E-S0. This instance requires detailed semantic analysis and cannot be solved with
alignment-based approaches. It represents a very difficult class of problems.
223
7 Conclusion
On theWeb, much of the information and opinions we encounter indicates the conditions or limitations
under which a statement is true. This information is important to Internet users who are interested in
determining the validity of a query of interest, but such information cannot be represented under the
prevalent RTE framework containing only ENTAILMENT and CONTRADICTION.
In this paper, we provided a logical definition of the CONFINEMENT relation and showed how it
could be used to represent important information that is omitted under an RTE framework. We also
proposed a set of semantic templates that use set of features extracted from sentences pairs to recognize
CONFINEMENT relations between two sentences. Preliminary investigations showed that given correct
feature input, semantic templates could effectively recognize CONFINEMENT relations.
In addition, we presented empirical evaluation of the effectiveness of semantic templates and
automatically-extracted features at recognizing CONFINEMENT between user queries and Web text pairs,
and conducted error analysis of the results. Currently, our system does not deal with unknown instances
well since it extracts features for semantic template using manually constructed lexical patterns. In fu-
ture work, we will learn features for the semantic templates directly from data to better handle unknown
instances.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
Japan.
References
Abe, T. (1996). Restriction with? dake ?and modification with quantifier. Tsukuba Japanese Research 1, 4?20. in Japanese.
Etoh, J. and M. Okumura (2005). Cross-document relationship between sentences corpus. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Natural Language Processing, pp. 482?485. (in Japanese).
Giampiccolo, D., B. Magnini, I. Dagan, and B. Dolan (2007). The third pascal recognizing textual entailment challenge. In
Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, RTE ?07, Morristown, NJ, USA, pp.
1?9. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kudo, T. and Y. Matsumoto (2002). Japanese dependency analysis using cascaded chunking. In CoNLL 2002: In Proceedings
of the 6th Conference on Natural Language Learning 2002 (COLING 2002 Post-Conference Workshops), pp. 63?69.
Matsuyoshi, S., M. Eguchi, C. Sao, K. Murakami, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2010). Annotating event mentions in text
with modality, focus, and source information. In Proceedings of the 7th International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC?10).
Mizuno, J., H. Goto, Y. Watanabe, K. Murakami, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2010). Local Structural Alignment for Recogniz-
ing Semantic Relations between Sentences. In Proceedings of IPSJ-NL196. (in Japanese).
Murakami, K., S. Matsuyoshi, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2009). A corpus of statement pairs with semantic relations in
Japanese. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the Association for Natural Language Processing.
Murakami, K., E. Nichols, S. Matsuyoshi, A. Sumida, S. Masuda, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2009). Statement map: As-
sisting information credibility analysis by visualizing arguments. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on Information
Credibility on the Web (WICOW 2009), pp. 43?50.
Nakagawa, H. and T. Mori (1995). Pragmatic analysis of aspect morphemes in manual sentences in Japanese. The Association
for Natural Language Processing 2(4), 19 ? 36. in Japanese.
Radev, D. R. (2000). Common theory of information fusion from multiple text sources step one: Cross-document structure. In
Proceedings of the 1st SIGdial workshop on Discourse and dialogue, pp. 74?83.
Sammons, M., V. G. V. Vydiswaran, T. Vieira, N. Johri, M.-W. Chang, D. Goldwasser, V. Srikumar, G. Kundu, Y. Tu, K. Small,
J. Rule, Q. Do, and D. Roth (2009). Relation alignment for textual entailment recognition. In Proceedings of Recognizing
Textual Entailment 2009.
Sumida, A., N. Yoshinaga, and K. Torisawa (2008). Boosting precision and recall of hyponymy relation acquisition from
hierarchical layouts in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 6th International Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08).
Szpektor, I., E. Shnarch, and I. Dagan (2007). Instance-based evaluation of entailment rule acquisition. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp. 456?463.
224
