Upper Modeling: organizing knowledge for natural 
language processing 
J ohn  A .  Bateman 
USC/ In format ion  Sciences Inst i tute  
4676 Admira l ty  Way 
Mar ina  del Rey, CA 90292-6695, U.S.A. 
e-mail:  bateman@isi .edu 
Abst rac t  
A general, reusable computational resource has been de- 
veloped within the Penman text generation project for 
organizing domain knowledge appropriately for linguis- 
tic realization. This resource, called the upper  model, 
provides a domain- and task-independent classification 
system' that supports sophisticated natural language 
processing while significantly simplifying the interface 
between domain-specific knowledge and general linguis- 
tic resources. This paper presents the results of our ex- 
periences in designing and using the upper model in a 
variety of applications over the past 5 years. In par- 
ticular, we present our conclusions concerning the ap- 
propriate organization of an upper model, its domain- 
independence, and the types of interrelationships that 
need to be supported between upper model and gram- 
mar and semantics. 
In t roduct ion :  in ter fac ing  w i th  a text  
generat ion  sys tem 
Consider the task of interfacing a domain-independent, 
reusable, general text generation system with a partic- 
ular application domain, in order to allow that appli- 
cation to express ystem-internal information in one or 
more natural anguages. Internal information eeds to 
be related to strategies for expressing it. This could 
be done in a domain-specific way by coding how the 
application domain requires its information to appear. 
This is clearly problematic, however: it requires de- 
tailed knowledge on the part of the system builder both 
of how the generator controls its output forms and the 
kinds of information that the application domain con- 
tains. A more general solution to the interfacing prob- 
lem is thus desirable. 
We have found that the definition of a mapping be- 
tween knowledge and its linguistic expression is facil- 
itated if it is possible to classify any particular in- 
stances of facts, states of affairs, situations, etc. that 
occur in terms of a set of general objects and re- 
lations of specified types that behave systematically 
with respect to their possible linguistic realizations. 
This approach has been followed within the PENMAN 
text generation system \[Mann and Matthiessen, 1985; 
The Penman Project, 1989\] where, over the past 5 
years, we have been developing and using an extensive, 
domain- and task-independent organization of knowl- 
edge that supports natural language generation: this 
level of organization is called the upper  model  \[Bate- 
man et aL, 1990; Mann, 1985; Moore and Arens, 1985\]. 
The majority of natural anguage processing systems 
currently planned or under development are now recog- 
nizing the necessity of some level of abstract 'semantic' 
organization similar to the upper model that classifies 
knowledge so that it may be more readily expressed 
linguisticaUy. 1 However, they mostly suffer from either 
a lack of theoretical constraint concerning their internal 
contents and organization and the necessary mappings 
between them and surface realization, or a lack of ab- 
straction which binds them too closely with linguistic 
form. It is important both that the contents of such 
a level of abstraction be motivated on good theoretical 
grounds and that the mapping between that level and 
linguistic form is specifiable. 
Our extensive xperiences with the implementation 
and use of a level of semantic organization of this kind 
within the PENMAN system now permit us to state some 
clear design criteria and a well-developed set of neces- 
sary functionalities. 
The  Upper  Mode l ' s  Cont r ibut ion  to  the  
So lu t ion  to  the  In ter face  Prob lem:  
Domain  independence  and  reusab i l i ty  
The upper model decomposes the mapping problem by 
establishing a level of linguistically motivated knowl- 
edge organization specifically constructed as a reponse 
XIncluding, for example: the Functional Sentence Struc- 
ture of  XTRA: \[Allgayer et al, 1989\]; \[Chen and Cha, 
1988\]; \[Dahlgren et al, 1989\]; POLYGLOSS: \[Emele et ai., 
1990\]; certain of the Domain and Text Structure Objects 
of SPOKESMAN: \[Meteer, 1989\]; TRANSLATOR: \[Nixenberg et
aL, 1987\]; the Semantic Relations of ~UROTa^-D: \[Steiner 
et al, 1987\]; JANUS: \[Weischedel, 1989\]. Space naturally 
precludes detailed comparisons here: see \[Bateman, 1990\] 
for further discussion. 
54 
to the task of constraining linguistic realizations2; gen- 
erally we refer to this level of organization as mean- 
ing rather than as knowledge in order to distinguish 
it from language-independent k owledge and to em- 
phasize its tight connection with linguistic forms (cf. 
\[Matthiessen, 1987:259-260\]). While it may not be rea- 
sonable to insist that application domains organize their 
knowledge in terms that respect linguistic realizations 
- -  as this may not provide suitable orgunizations for, 
e.g., domain-internal reasoning - -  we have found that 
it is reasonable, indeed essential, that domain knowl- 
edge be so organized if it is also to support expression 
in natural anguage relying on general natural anguage 
processing capabilities. 
The general types constructed within the upper 
model necessarily respect generalizations concerning 
how distinct semantic types can be realized. We then 
achieve the necessary link between particular domain 
knowledge and the upper model by having an appli- 
cation classify its knowledge organization in terms of 
the general semantic ategories that the upper model 
provides. This does not require any expertise in gram- 
mar or in the mapping between upper model and gram- 
mar. An application eeds only to concern itself with 
the 'meaning' of its own knowledge, and not with fine 
details of linguistic form. This classification functions 
solely as an interface between domain knowledge and 
upper model; it does not interfere with domain-internal 
organization. The text generation system is then re- 
sponsible for realizing the semantic types of the level 
of meaning with appropriate grammatical forms, s Fur- 
ther, when this classification has been established for 
a given application, application concepts can be used 
freely in input specifications since their possiblities for 
linguistic realization are then known. This supports 
two significant functionalities: 
? interfacing with a natural language system is radi- 
cally simplified since much of the information spe- 
cific to language processing is factored out of the in- 
put specifications required and into the relationship 
between upper model and linguistic resources; 
? the need for domain-specific linguistic processing 
rules is greatly reduced since the upper model pro- 
vides a domain-independent, general and reusable 
conceptual organization that may be used to classify 
all domain-specific knowledge when linguistic pro- 
cessing is to be performed. 
~Although my discussion here is oriented towards text 
generation, our current research aims at fully bi-directional 
linguistic resources \[Kasper, 1988; Kasper, 1989\]; the map- 
ping is therefore to be understood as a bi.directional map- 
ping throughout. 
3This is handled in the PeNM*N system by the grammar's 
inquiry semantics, which has been described and illustrated 
extensively elsewhere (e.g., \[Bateman, 1988; Mann, 1983; 
Matthiessen, 1988\]). 
An example of the simplification that use of the upper 
model offers for a text generation system interface lan- 
guage can be seen by contrasting the input specification 
required for a generator such as MUMBLE-86 \[Meteer el 
al., 1987\] - -  which employs realization classes consid- 
erably less abstract han those provided by the upper 
model - -  with the input required for Penman. 4 Fig- 
ure 1 shows corresponding inputs for the generation of 
the simple clause: Fluffy is chasing little mice. The ap- 
propriate classification of domain knowledge concepts 
such as chase, cat, mouse, and little in terms of the 
general semantic types of the upper model (in this case, 
directed-action, object, object, and size respectively - -
for definitions ee: \[Bateman et al, 1990\]) automatically 
provides information about syntactic realization that 
needs to be explicitly stated in the MUMBLE-86 input 
(e.g., S-V-O_two-explicit-args, rip-common-noun, 
restrictive-modifier, adjective). Thus, for ex- 
ample, the classification of a concept mouse as an ob- 
ject in the upper model is sufficient for the grammar 
to consider a realization such as, in MUMBLE-86 terms, 
a general -np with a particular np-common-noun a d 
accessor ies  of gender neuter.  Similarly, the classi- 
fication of chase as a directed-action opens up linguis- 
tic realization possibilities including clauses with a cer- 
tain class of transitive verbs and characteristic possi- 
bilities for participants, corresponding nominalizations, 
etc. Such low-level syntactic information is redundent 
for the PENMAN input. 
The further domain-independence of the upper model 
is shown in the following example of text generation 
control. Consider two rather different domains: a navy 
database of ships and an expert system for digital cir- 
cuit diagnosis. 5 The navy data base contains informa- 
tion concerning ships, submarines, ports, geographical 
regions, etc. and the kinds of activities that ships, sub- 
marines, etc. can take part in. The digital circuit di- 
agnosis expert system contains information about sub- 
components ofdigital circuits, the kinds of connections 
between those subcomponents, heir possible functions, 
etc. A typical sentence from each domain might be: 
circuit domain: The faulty system is connected to 
the input 
navy domain: The ship which was inoperative is 
sailing to Sasebo 
The input specifications for both of these sentences 
are shown in Figure 2. These specifications freely in- 
termix upper model roles and concepts (e.g., domain, 
'Note that this is not intended to single out MUMBL~-88: 
the problem is quite general; cf. unification-based fframe- 
works such as \[McKeown and Paris, 1987\], or the Lexi- 
cal Functional Grammar (LFG)-based approach of \[Momma 
and DSrre, 1987\]. As mentioned above, the current devel- 
opments within most such approaches are now considering 
extensions similar to that covered by the upper model. 
SThese are, in fact, two domains with which we have had 
experience generating texts using the upper model. 
55 
(general-clause 
:head (CHASFES/S-V-0_two-explicit -args 
(genereL1-np 
:head (rip-proper-name ?'Fluffy") 
: accessor ies  ( : number s ingu lar  
: gender mascul ine 
:person th i rd  
: determiner -po l i cy  
no-determiner)  ) 
(genera l -np  
:head (np-common-noun "mouse") 
: accessor ies  ( : number p lu ra l  
: gender neuter  
: person th i rd  
: detei~miner-pol icy 
init iall y-inde f init e) 
: further-specifications 
( ( : attachment-function 
restrictive-mod/fier 
: specification 
(predication-to-be *self* 
(ad jec t ive  "little"))) 
)) ) 
:accessories (:tense-modal present :progressive 
:unmarked) ) 
.- Input to MUMSLE-86 for the clause: 
Fluffy is chasing little mice 
from: Meteer, McDonald, Anderson, Forster, Gay, 
Huettner, and Sibun (1987) 
(e / chase 
:ac tor  (e / cat  :name F lu f fy )  
:ac tee  (m / mouse 
:size-ascription (s / little) 
:lultiplicity-q multiple 
: s ingu lax i t  y-q nonsinbmlar) 
: tense present -progress ive)  
Corresponding input to PENMAN 
Figure 1: Comparison of input requirements for 
MUMBLE-86 and PENMAN 
range, property-ascription) and the respective domain 
roles and concepts (e.g., system, faulty, input, destina- 
tion, sail, ship, inoperative). Both forms are rendered 
interpretable by the subordination of the domain con- 
cepts to the single generalized hierarchy of the upper 
model. This is illustrated graphically in Figure 3. Here 
we see the single hierarchy of the upper model being 
used to subordinate concepts from the two domains. 
The domain concept system, for example, is subordi- 
nated to the upper model concept object, domain con- 
cept inoperat ive to upper model concept quality, etc. 
By virtue of these subordinations, the grammar and se- 
mantics of the generator can interpret the input speci- 
fications in order to produce appropriate linguistic re- 
alizations: the upper model concept object licenses a 
particular set of realizations, as do the concepts qual- 
ity, material-process, etc. 
Our present upper model contains approximately 200 
(e l  / connects 
:domain (v2 / system 
: relations 
(v3 / property-ascription 
: domain v2 
:range (v4 / faulty))) 
:range (v5 / input) 
: tense present) 
Input for digital circuit example sentence: 
The faulty system is connected to the input 
(el / sail 
:actor (v2 / ship 
: relat ions 
(v3 / property-ascription 
: domain v2 
:range (v4 / inoperative) 
: tense past) 
:destination (sasebo / port) 
:tense present-progressive) 
Input for navy example sentence: 
The ship which was inoperative is sailing to Sasebo 
Figure 2: Input specifications from navy and digital 
circuit domains 
such categories, as motivated by the requirements of the 
grammar, and is organized as a structured inheritance 
lattice represented in the LOOM knowledge representa- 
tion language \[MacGregor and Bates, 1987\]. Generally, 
the upper model represents the speaker's experience in 
terms of generalized linguistically-motivated 'ontolog- 
ical' categories. More specifically, the following infor- 
mation is required (with example categories drawn from 
the current PENMAN upper model): 
? abstract specifications of process-type/relations and 
configurations of participants and circumstances 
(e.g., NO NDIRECTED- 
ACTION, ADDRESSEE-ORIENTED-VERBAL-PROCESS, 
ACTOR, SENSER, RECIPIENT, SPATIO-TEMPORAL, 
CAUSAL-RELATION, GENERALIZED-MEANS), 
? abstract specifications of object types, for, e.g., se- 
mantic selection restrictions (e.g., 
DECOMPOSABLE-OBJECT, ABSTRACTION, PERSON, 
SPATIAL-TEMPORAL), 
? abstract specifications ofquality types, and the types 
of entities which they may relate (e.g., BEHAVIORAL- 
QUALITY, SENSE-AND-MEASURE'QUALITY, STATUS- 
QUALITY), 
? abstract specifications of combinations of events (e.g., 
DISJUNCTION, EXEMPLIFICATION, RESTATEMENT). 
These are described in full in \[Bateman et al, 1990\]. 
Appropriate linguistic realizations are not in a one- 
to-one correspondence with upper model concepts, how- 
ever. The relationship needs to be rather more complex 
and so the question of justification of upper model con- 
cepts and organization becomes crucial. 
56 
I 
Figure 3: Upper model organization reuse with differing 
domains 
Degree of Abstraction vs. Linguistic 
Responsibility 
The general semantic types defined by a level of mean- 
ing such as the upper model need to be 'linguisti- 
cally responsible', in that mappings between them and 
linguistic form may be constructed. In addition, to 
be usable by an application, they must also be suf- 
ficiently operationalizable so as to support consistent 
coding of application knowledge. Both of these require- 
ments have tended to push the level of organization 
defined closer towards linguistic form. However, it is 
also crucial for this organization to be su~ciently ab- 
stract, i.e., removed from linguistic form, so that it is 
possible for an application to achieve its classification 
purely on grounds of meaning. It is thus inadequate 
to rely on form-oriented criteria for upper model con- 
struction because grammatical classifications are often 
non-isomorphic tosemantic lassifications: they there- 
fore need to deviate from semantic organization i or- 
der to respect he syntactic riteria that define them. 
Reliance on details of linguistic realization also compro- 
mises the design aim that the applications should not 
be burdened with grammatical knowledge, e 
eThis is also resonant with the design aim in text gen- 
eration that higher level processes -- e.g., text planners 
should not need irect access to low level information such as 
the grammar \[Hovy et al, 1988\]. For descriptions ofall these 
Thus, the level of abstraction of an upper model must 
be sufficiently high that it generalizes across syntac- 
tic alternations, without being so high that the map- 
ping between it and surface form is impossible to state. 
This tension between the requirements of abstractness 
and linguistic responsibility presents perhaps the ma- 
jor point of general theoretical difficulty and interest 
for future developments of upper model-like levels of 
meaning. Without a resolution, substantive progress 
that goes beyond revisions of what the PENMAN up- 
per model already contains is unlikely to be achieved. 
It is essential for constraints to be found for what an 
upper model should contain and how it should be orga. 
nized so that an appropriate level of abstraction may be 
constructed. 
Constraining the Organization of an 
Upper Model 
Figure 4 sets several methodologies have been pursued 
for uncovering the organization" and contents of a level 
of meaning such as an upper model, with examples of 
approaches that have adopted them, along the contin- 
uum of abstraction from linguistic form to abstract on- 
tology. While the problem of being too bound to lin- 
guistic form has been mentioned, there are also severe 
problems with attempts to construct an upper model 
independent of form and motivated by other criteria, 
e.g., a logical theory of the organization of knowledge 
per se. Without a strong theoretical connection to the 
linguistic system the criteria for organizing an abstrac- 
tion hierarchy remain ill-specified; there is very little 
guarantee that such systems will organize themselves 
in a way appropriate for interfacing well with the lin- 
guistic system. 7 
An alternative route is offered by the approaches 
in the middle of the continuum, i.e., those which ab- 
stract beyond linguistic form but which still maintain 
a commitment to language as a motivating force. This 
is further strengthened by the notion, now resurgent 
within current linguistics, that the organization of lan- 
guage informs us about the organization of 'knowl- 
edge' (e.g., \[HaUiday, 1978; Jackendoff, 1983; Lan- 
gacker, 1987; Matthiessen, 1987; Talmy, 1987\]): that is, 
the relation between grammar and semantics/meaning 
is not arbitrary. Detailed theories of grammar can then 
be expected to provide us with insights concerning the 
organization that is required for the level of meaning. 
We have found that the range of meanings required to 
support one particular generalized functional region of 
distinctions in detail, see the PENMAN documentation \[The 
Penman Project, 1989\]. 
7Furthermore, the experience of the JANUS project (e.g., 
\[Weischedel, 1989\]) has been that the cost of using a suffi- 
ciently rich logic to permit axiomatization of the complex 
phenomenon required is very high, motivating augmentation 
by an abstraction hierarchy very similar to that of the upper 
model and facing the same problem of definitional criteria. 
57 
nonlinguistic 
linguistic 
reahty 
knowledge 
meaning 
form 
cognit ive-  'psychological' 
situational - -  
'socio/psycho-logical' 
grammatical semantics 
inquiry semantics 
clause-based 
lexicai semantics 
word senses 
word-based 
syntactic realization classes 
syntax 
Weischedel (1989) 
Langacker (1987) 
Steiner (fc) 
Halllday & Matthiessen (fc) 
PENMAN UPPER MODEL 
Jackendoff (1983), LVG 
Mel'euk & ~holkovskij (1970) 
Steiner et al (1987) 
LFG 
Figure 4: Sources of motivations for upper model development 
the grammar developed within the PENMAN system pro- 
vides a powerful set of organizing constraints concern- 
ing what an upper model should contain. It provides 
for the representation f'conceptual' meanings at a high 
level of abstraction while still maintaining a mapping to 
linguistic form. This functional region corresponds with 
the Systemic Functional Linguistic notion of the expe- 
riential metafunction \[Matthiessen, 19877\], one of four 
generalized meaning types which are simultanously and 
necessarily made whenever language is used. Any sen- 
tence must contain contributions to its function from all 
four 'metafunctions' R each metafunction providing a 
distinct type of constraint. The value of this factoriza- 
tion of distinct meaning types as far as the design of 
an upper model is concerned can best be seen by ex- 
amining briefly what it ezcludes from consideration for 
inclusion within an upper model: i.e., all information 
that is controlled by the remaining three metafunctions 
should not be represented. 
The logical metaf~nction is responsible for the con- 
struction of composite semantic entities using the re- 
sources of interdependency; it is manifested in grammar 
by dependency relationships such as those that hold be- 
tween the head of a phrase and its dependents and the 
association of concepts to be expressed with particu- 
lar heads in the sentence structure. The removal of 
this kind of information permits upper model specifi- 
cations to be independent of grammatical constituents 
and grammatical dominance relations. 
This relaxes, for example, the mapping between ob- 
jects and processes at the upper model level and nomi- 
nals and verbals at the grammatical level, enabling en- 
eralizations to be captured concerning the existence of 
verbal participants in nominalizations, and permits the 
largely textual variations hown in (1) and (2) 8 to be 
removed from the upper model coding. 
(1) It will probably rain tomorrow 
It is fikely that it will rain tomorrow 
SExample taken from \[Meteer, 1988\]. 
There is a high probability that it will rain tomorrow 
(2) independently 
in a way that is independent 
No change in upper model representation r classifica- 
tion is required to represent these variations. 
This can be seen more specifically by considering the 
following PENMAN input specification that uses only up- 
per model terms: 
((cO / came-effect  
: domain discharge 
: range breakdown) 
(discharge / d i rected-act ion 
:actee (e lec t r i c i ty  / substance)) 
(breakdoen / nondirected-action 
:actor (system / object))) 
This states that there are two configurations of pro- 
cesses and participants - -  one classified as an upper 
model directed-action, the other as a nondirected-action 
- -  which are related by the upper model relationship 
cause-effect. Now, the assignment of concepts to differ- 
ently 'ranked' heads in the grammar governs realization 
variants including the following: 
Electricity being discharged resulted in the system 
breaking down. 
Because electricity was discharged, the system broke 
down. 
Because of electricity being discharged the system broke 
down. 
. . .  the breakdown of the system due to an electrical 
discharge... 
Electricity was discharged causing the system to break 
down. 
. . .  an electrical discharge causing the breakdown of the 
system... 
etc. 
Many such 'paraphrase' issues are currently of concern 
within the text generation community (e.g., \[Meteer, 
1988; Iordanskaja et al, 1988; Bateman and Paris, 
1989; Bateman, 1989\]). 
The textual metafunction is responsible for the cre- 
ation and presentation of text in context, i.e., for estab- 
58  
lishing textual cohesion, thematic development, rhetori- 
cal organization, information salience, etc. The removal 
of this kind of information allows upper model specifi- 
cations to be invariant with respect o their particular 
occasions of use in texts and the adoption of textually 
motivated perspectives, such as, e.g., theme/rheme s - 
lections, definiteness, anaphora, etc. Thus, with the 
same input specification as above, the following varia- 
tions are supported by varying the textual constraints: 
It was the electricity being discharged that resulted in 
the system breaking down. 
The discharge of electricity resulted in the system break- 
ing down. 
The system breaking down --  the electricity being dis- 
charged did it! 
etc. 
These textual variations are controlled uring the 
construction oftext (cf. \[Matthiessen, 1987; Dale, 1989; 
Hovy and McCoy, 1989; Meteer, 1989; Bateman and 
Matthiessen, 1990\]) and, again, are factored out of the 
upper model. 
The interpersonal metafunction is responsible for the 
speaker's interaction with the listener, for the speech 
act type of an utterance, the force with which it is ex- 
pressed, etc. Thus, again with the same input specifi- 
cation, the following variants are possible: 
Did electricity being discharged result in the system 
breaking down? 
Electricity being discharged resulted surprisingly in the 
whole damn thing breaking down. 
1 rather suspect hat electricity being discharged may 
have resulted in the system breaking down. 
etc. 
The metafunctional factorization thus permits the 
upper model to specify experiential meanings that are 
invariant with respect to the linguistic alternations 
driven by the other metafunetions. That is, a speci- 
fication in upper model terms is consistent with a set of 
linguistic realizations that may be regarded as 'experi- 
ential paraphrases': the specification expresses the 'se- 
mantic' content that is shared across those paraphrases 
and often provides just the level of linguistically de- 
committed representation required for nonlinguistically 
oriented applications. Generation of any unique sur- 
face realization is achieved by additionally respecting 
the functional constraints hat the other metafunctions 
bring to bear; particular surface forms are only specifi- 
able when a complete set of constraints from each of the 
four metafunctions are combined. The application of 
these constraints i  directly represented in the PENMAN 
grammar, which provides for the perspicuous and mod- 
ular integration of many disparate sources of informa- 
tion. The interdependencies b tween these constraints 
and their conditions of applicability are also directly 
represented in the grammar. This organization of the 
grammar allows us to construct a rather abstract up- 
per model while still preserving the necessary mapping 
to linguistic form. The value of achieving the abstract 
specification ofmeaning supported by the upper model 
is then that it permits a genuinely form-independent, 
but nevertheless form-constraining, 'conceptual' repre- 
sentation that can be used both as a statement of the 
semantic ontents of an utterance and as an abstract 
specification ofcontent for application domains that re- 
quire linguistic output. 
Summary  and  Conc lus ions  
A computational resource has been developed within 
the PENMAN text generation project that significantly 
simplifies control of a text generator. This resource, 
called the upper model, is a hierarchy of concepts that 
captures emantic distinctions necessary for generating 
natural anguage. Although similar levels of abstract 
semantic organization are now being sought in many 
natural language systems, they are often built anew for 
each project, are to an unnecessary extent domain or 
theory specific, are required to fulfill an ill-determined 
set of functionalities, and lack criteria for their design. 
This paper has presented the results of our experiences 
in designing and using the upper model in a variety of 
applications; in particular, it presented our conclusions 
concerning the appropriate source of constraints con- 
cerning the organization of an upper model. We have 
found that restricting the information contained in an 
upper model to experiential meaning has significantly 
improved our understanding of how a semantic hier- 
archy should be organized and how it needs to relate 
to the rest of the linguistic system. We strongly feel, 
therefore, that subsequently constructed semantic or- 
ganizations should follow the guidelines et out by the 
metafunctional hypothesis; the factorization that it pro- 
vides concerning what should, and should not, be rep- 
resented in an 'abstract semantic knowledge' hierarchy 
supports functionalities well beyond those envisioned in
current ext generation/understanding systems. 
Acknowledgments  
The upper model has been under development for several 
years, and many have and continue to contribute to it. The 
ideas I have reported on here would not have been possi- 
ble without hat development. Those responsible for the 
present form of the upper model include: William Mann, 
Christian Matthiessen, Robert Kasper, Richard Whitney, 
Johanna Moore, Eduard Hovy, Yigal Arens, and mysel? 
Thanks also to C~:ile Pads and Eduard Hovy for improving 
the paper's organization. Financial support was provided by 
AFOSR contract F49620-87-C-0005, and in part by DARPA 
contract MDA903-87-C-641. The opinions in this report are 
solely those of the author. 
References  
\[Allgayer et al, 1989\] JSrgen Allgayer, Karin Har- 
busch, Alfred Kobsa, Carola Reddig, Norbert Rei- 
thinger, and Dagmar Schmauks. Xtra: a natural- 
language access system to expert systems. Inter- 
59 
national Journal of Man-Machine Communication, 
1989. 
\[Bateman and Matthiessen, 1990\] John A. Bateman 
and Christian M.I.M. Matthiessen. Uncovering the 
text base. In Hermann Bluhme and Hag Keqi, edi- 
tors, Selected Papers from the International Confer- 
ence on Research in Text and Language, Xi'an Jiao- 
tong University, Xi'an, P.R. China, 29-31 March 
1989. 1990. 
\[Bateman and Paris, 1989\] John A. Bateman and 
C~cile L. Paris. Phrasing a text in terms the user 
can understand. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Inter- 
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Detroit, Michigan, 1989. IJCAI-89. 
\[Bateman etaL, 1990\] John A. Bateman, Robert T. 
Kasper, Johanna D. Moore, and Richard A. Whitney. 
A general organization of knowledge for natural lan- 
guage processing: the penman upper model. Techni- 
cal report, USC/Information Sciences Institute, Ma- 
rina .del Rey, California, 1990. 
\[Bateman, 1988\] John A. Bateman. Aspects of clause 
politeness in Japanese: an extended inquiry seman- 
tics treatment. In Proceedings of the 26th Inter- 
national Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
pages 147-154, Buffalo, New York, 1988. Association 
for Computational Linguistics. Also available as ISI 
Reprint Series report RS-88-211, USC/Information 
Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, California. 
\[Bateman, 1989\] John A. Baternan. Upper modelling 
for machine translation: a level of abstraction for 
preserving meaning. Technical Report EUROTRA- 
D Working Papers, No. 12, Institut fdr Angewandte 
Informationsforschung, Saarbriicken, West Germany, 
1989. 
\[Bateman, 1990\] John A. Bateman. Upper modeling: 
current states of theory and practise, 1990. PENMAN 
Development Note, USC/Inforrnation Sciences Insti- 
tute. 
\[Chen and Cha, 1988\] Keh-Jiann Chen and Chuan-Shu 
Cha. The design of a conceptual structure and its re- 
lation to the parsing of chinese sentences. In Proceed- 
ings of the 1988 International Conference on Com- 
puter Processing of Chinese and Oriental Languages, 
Toronto, Canada, August 29 - September 1 1988. 
\[Dahlgren etat., 1989\] Kathleen Dahlgren, Joyee Me- 
Dowell, and Edward P. Stabler. Knowledge represen- 
tation for commonsense r asoning with text. Com- 
putational Linguistics, 15(3):149-170, 1989. 
\[Dale, 1989\] Robert Dale. Cooking up referring expres- 
sions. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics, Vancouver, British Columbia, June 1989. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
\[Emele t al., 1990\] Martin Emele, Ulrich Heid, Walter 
Kehl, Stefan Momma, and R~mi Zajac. Organizing 
linguistic knowledge for multilingual generation. In 
COLING-90, 1990. Project Polygloss Paper, Univer- 
sity of Stuttgart, West Germany. 
\[Halliday and Matthiessen, forthcoming\] Michael A.K. 
Halliday and Christian M.I.M. Matthiessen. The 
Bloomington Lattice. Technical Report in prepara- 
tion, University of Sydney, Linguistics Department, 
Sydney, Aystralia, forthcoming. 
\[Halliday, 1978\] Michael A. K. Halliday. Language as 
social semiotic. Edward Arnold, London, 1978. 
\[Hovy and McCoy, 1989\] Eduard H. Hovy 
and Kathy F. McCoy. Focusing your RST: A step 
towards generating coherent multisentential text. In 
Proceedings of the llth. Annual Conference of the 
Cognitive Science Society, pages p667--674, Univer- 
sity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, August 16- 
19 1989. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
J 
\[Hovy et al, 1988\] Eduard H. Hovy, Douglas Appelt, 
and David D. McDonald. Workshop on text plan- 
ning and natural anguage generation, August 1988. 
Sponsored by American Association for Artificial In- 
teUigence. 
\[Iordanskaja et al, 1988\] Lidija Iordanskaja, Richard 
Kittredge, and Polgu~re Alain. Lexical selection 
and paraphrase in a meaning-text generation model, 
July 1988. Presented at the Fourth International 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation. Also ap- 
pears in selected papers from the workshop: Paris, 
Swartout and Mann (eds.)(1990)(op. cir.). 
\[Jackendoff, 1983\] Ray Jaekendoff. Semantics and 
Cognition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1983. 
\[Kasper, 1988\] Robert T. Kasper. An Experimental 
Parser for Systemic Grammars. In Proceedings of 
the 12th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, August 1988, Budapest, Hungary, 1988. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. Also 
available as Information Sciences Institute Technical 
Report No. ISI/RS-88-212, Marina del Rey, CA. 
\[Knsper, 1989\] Robert T. Kasper. Unification and clas- 
sification: an experiment in information-based pars- 
ing. In Proceedings of the International Workshop 
on Parsing Technologies, pages 1-7, 1989. 28-31 Au- 
gust, 1989, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania. 
\[Langacker, 1987\] Ronald W. Langaeker. Foundations 
in Cognitive Grammar. Stanford University Press, 
Stanford, California, 1987. 
\[MacGregor and Bates, 1987\] Robert MacGregor and 
Raymond Bates. The LOOM knowledge represen- 
tation language. In Proceedings of the Knowledge- 
Based Systems Workshop, 1987. Held in St. Louis, 
60 
Missouri, April 21-23, 1987. Also available as ISI 
reprint series report, RS-87-188, USC/Information 
Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA. 
\[Mann and Matthiessen, 1985\] William C. Mann and 
Christian M.I.M. Matthiessen. Demonstration f the 
nigel text generation computer program. In J. Ben- 
son and W. Greaves, editors, Systemic Perspectives 
on Discourse, Volume 1. Ablex, Norwood, New Jer- 
sey, 1985. 
\[Mann, 1983\] William C. Mann. The anatomy of a 
systemic hoice. Discourse processes, 1983. Also 
available as USC/Information Sciences Institute, Re- 
search Report ISI/RR-82-104, 1982. 
\[Mann, 1985\] William C. Mann. Janus abstraction 
structure - draft 1, 1985. An informal project ech- 
nical memo of the Janus project at ISI. 
\[Matthiessen, 1987\] 
Christian M.I.M. Matthiessen. Notes on the organi- 
zation of the environment ofa text generation gram- 
mar. In G. Kempen, editor, Natural Language Gen- 
eration: Recent Advances in Artificial Intelligence, 
Psychology, and Linguistics. Kluwer Academic Pub- 
lishers, Boston/Dordrecht, 1987. Paper presented 
at the Third International Workshop on Natural 
Language Generation, August 1986, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. 
\[Matthiessen, 1988\] Christian M.I.M. Matthiessen. Se- 
mantics for a systemic grammar: the chooser and 
inquiry framework. In James Benson, Michael Cum- 
mings, and William Grenves, editors, Linguistics in a 
Systemic Perspective. Benjamins, Amsterdam, 1988. 
Also available as USC/Information Sciences Insti- 
tute, Reprint Series Report ISI/RS-87-189, Marina 
del Rey, CA. 
\[McKeown and Paris, 1987\] Kathleen R. 
McKeown and C~cile L. Paris. Functional unifica- 
tion grammar evisited. In Proceedings of the 25th 
Annual Meeting of the ACL, Palo Alto, California, 
1987. Association of Computational Linguistics. 
\[Mel'~uk and Zholkovskij, 1970\] A. Mel'~uk, Igor and 
A.K. Zholkovskij. Towards a functioning "meaning- 
text" model of language. Linguistics, 57:10-47, 1970. 
\[Meteer et al, 1987\] Marie W. Meteer, David D. Mc- 
Donald, S.D. Anderson, D. Forster, L.S. Gay, A.K. 
Huettner, and P. Sibun. MUMBLE-86: Design and 
implementation. Technical Report 87-87, COINS, 
University of Massachusetts, 1987. 
\[Meteer, 1988\] Marie W. Mercer. Defining a vocabu- 
lary for text planning, August 1988. Presented at 
the AAAI-88 Workshop on Text Planning and Real- 
ization, organized by Eduard H. Hovy, Doug Appelt, 
David McDonald and Sheryl Young. 
\[Meteer, 1989\] W Meteer, Marie. The SPOKESMAN nat- 
ural language generation system. Technical Report 
BBN Report No. 7090, BBN Systems and Technolo- 
gies Corporation, Cambridge, MA., 1989. 
\[Momma nd DSrre, 1987\] Stefan Momma and Jochen 
DSrre. Generation from f-structures. In Ewan Klein 
and Johann Van Bentham, editors, Categories, Poly- 
morphism and Unification. Cognitive Science Centre, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1987. 
\[Moore and Areas, 1985\] Johanna D. Moore and Yi- 
gal Arens. A hierarchy for entities, 1985. 
USC/Information Sciences Institute, Internal Draft. 
\[Nirenberg el al., 1987\] Sergei Nirenberg, V. Raskin, 
and A. Tucker. The structure of interlingua in 
TRANSLATOR. In Sergei Nirenberg, editor, Machine 
Translation: Theoretical and Methodological Issues. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
\[Paris et al, 1990\] C~cile L. 
Paris, William R. Swartout, and William C. Mann, 
editors. Natural Language Generation in Artificial 
Intelligence and Computational Linguistics. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1990. 
\[Steiner et al, 1987\] Erich H. Steiner, Ursula Eckert, 
Birgit Week, and Jutta Winter. The development of 
the EUROTRA-D system of semantic relations. Tech- 
nical Report Eurotra-D Working Papers, No. 2, In- 
stitut der angewandten I formationsforschung, Uni- 
versit~it des Saarlandes, Saarbriicken, West Germany, 
1987. 
\[Steiner, 1990\] Erich H. Steiner. A model off goal- 
directed-action as a structuring principle for the con- 
text of situation in systemic linguistics. Mouton and 
de Gruyter, Berlin, 1990. 
\[Talmy, 1987\] Leonard Talmy. The relation of gram- 
mar to cognition. In B. Rudzka-Ostyn, editor, Topics 
in Cognitive Linguistics. John Benjamins, 1987. 
\[The Penman Project, 1989\] The Penman 
Project. The PENMAN documentation: User guide, 
primer, reference manual, and nigel manual. Techni- 
cal report, USC/Information Sciences Institute, Ma- 
rina del Rey, CA, 1989. 
\[Weischedel, 1989\] Ralph M. Weischedel. A hybrid ap- 
proach to representation in the janus natural an- 
guage processor. In ~Tth Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 193- 
202, Vancouver, British Columbia, 1989. 
6:i. 
