Predictable Meaning Shift: 
Some Linguistic Properties of Lexical Implication Rules 
Nicholas Ostler 
Touche Ross Management Consultants 
B.T.S. Atkins 
Oxford University Press 
17 Oakley Road 
London N1 3LL 
UK. 
nicholas_ostler@ eurokom.ie 
11 South Street 
Lewes, Sussex BN7 2BT 
UK. 
btatkins@uk.ac.oxford.vax 
Abstract 
Drawing on a growing database of systematic relationships between word-senses, 
the authors argue that a significant class of these represent Lexical Implication 
Rules, a set of formal rules within the domain of lexical semantics; these they 
distinguish from other types of semantic relation more closely dependent on 
metaphor and world-knowledge. Some formal properties of Lexical Implication 
Rules are proposed, as evidence of their linguistic, rather than real-world, nature. 
1. Introduction: Lexical Implication Rules 
It is a truism that people, in interpreting and producing language, make use of 
both linguistic and real-world knowledge. We contend that part of that linguistic 
knowledge is a knowledge of lexical semantics. Lexical semantics i discernible 
from real- world knowledge, because the inferences used are in certain cases 
formally distinct from commonsense inferences and from metaphors based on 
analogies. That is the position we attempt to substantiate in this paper. 
The focus of this paper is a series of arguments justifying the existence of Lexical 
Implication Rules (henceforth "LIRs"). Such rules in principle generate derived 
lexical entries from base lexical entries. We contend that they are bona fide rules in 
the formal grammar of languages involved; it is wrong to see them as mere 
reflections, quasi-systematic effects of applying the formal structures of a 
language in a real-world context. 
As evidence of this we adduce formal properties of the incidence of some of the 
rules. We postulate: 
? that application of the rules is sometimes blocked by the pre-existing 
topography of the lexicon (pre-emption); 
? that formal features of the words involved, apparently unrelated to the 
semantic effect of the rules, may inhibit LIR application; 
? that semantic features of the words input, apparently unrelated to the 
semantic effect of the rules themselves, may similarly inhibit LIR application; 
? that some rules are specific to particular languages, and indeed to specific 
dialects of a given language. 
All these facts seem incompatible with the hypothesis that LIRs are side-effects of 
the the interaction of language use with speakers' knowledge of the real world. 
They call for a structured theory of lexical semantics, and this paper is intended as a 
contribution to building such a theory.1 
1Lexical semantics is nonetheless constrained bythe real world, to the extent that (a) real-world 
knowledge and analogy will of course be necessary in many cases to give a complete interpretation 
76 
The position outlined here arises from current work on the analysis and 
categorization f a database of well over 100 instances of predictable xical and 
semantic alternations. These instances of systematic word-sense relationship are 
hard to categorize fully, but the majority appear to have properties which show 
them not to be mere corollaries of speakers' free play with analogy and terse 
assumption of real-world situations. They have something in common with the set 
of Lexical Rules used in Lexical Functional Grammar (cf Bresnan (1982)), but are 
primarily conceptual rather than syntactic. While it is already clear that there is great 
variety in the theoretical status of the rules in this set, we shall argue that there is 
clear evidence that at least some of these rules, the LIRs, must be defined as 
applying to word-meanings; they are not derivable as generalizations over world- 
knowledge, or facts about he world or the society described, but must be stated in 
a full grammar of the language in which they occur. 
The significance of this is more than a theoretical nicety. It is important to 
computational linguistics to include these facts in its lexicon, rather than as a special 
kind of world knowledge, since the former will be in general more restricted and 
hence more manageable. 
2. Some First Examples of LIRs; Contrast with some other Semantic Shifts 
A few straightforward examples from English will give a first intuitive feel for the 
kind of lexical implications to be represented asLIRs. 
LIR Hunting Plural 
NC (count noun) singular: animal -> NPL: in hunting context 
e.g. I can see an elephant. / They've gone out after elephant. 
also tiger, shark, shrimp, partridge, pigeon etc. 
(1) 
LIR Vehicle Verb (2) 
NC singular : vehicle -> VTI (verb transitive/intransitive): to travel/transport 
using that vehicle 
e.g. He's got a new cycle. / Let's cycle into town. 
also motor, ferry, canoe, ship, jet etc. 
LIR Animal - Meat 
NC: animal -> NU (uncountable ormass): meat from that animal 
e.g. Mary had a little lamb. / He won't touch lamb any more. 
also chicken, goose, monkey, dog, swordfish, shark etc. 
(3) 
LIR Power Source Attribute (4) 
NU: energy source -> NMOD (noun modifier): powered by that source 
e.g. There's no gas left. / A gas oven. 
also steam, water, wind, coal, air etc. 
LIR Dance Verb 
NC: dance -> VI: do that dance 
e.g. Can you do a waltz? / He's learning to waltz. 
also tango, quickstep, foxtrot, cancan etc. 
(5) 
of language as it is used; and (b) something impossible orimperceptible will not be lexicalized. 
(We characterize b low the phenomenon f pragmatic exclusion.). 
77 
LIR-ful Derived Noun (6) 
NC: container -> \[NC+ful \]NC: amount it contains/its contents 
e.g. I don't use a thimble. / Add a mere thimbleful of brandy. 
also all purpose-built containers (trunk, tank, jug, hamper, bucket, basket etc.), 
and some other items that can be viewed as containers (e.g. spade, spoon, fork, 
hand, fist, belly,...) 
L1R Container - Amount/Contents (7) 
NC: container (purpose-built only) -> NC: amount it contains/its contents 
e.g. The glass broke. / Add a glass of wine. Don't drink the whole glass. 
also all purpose-built containers (trunk, tank, jug, hamper, bucket, basket etc.) 
LIR Material Adjective 
NU: material -> NMOD: made of that material 
e.g. It's best quality linen. / A linen sheet. 
also polyester, plastic, stone, diamond, granite, lead etc. 
(8) 
LIR -en Derived Adjective (defunct?) 
NU: material -> \[NU+-en\] ADJ : made of that material 
e.g. The ring is made of a gold. / A golden ring. 
also wood, leather, oak, lead, wool 
LIR Constitution - State 
NU: form of government -> NC: state with that form 
e.g. Dem~racy is at risk. / Democracies must take action. 
also oligarchy, monarchy, tyranny, dictatorship etc. 
(9) 
(10) 
LIR Nationality Plural 
ADJ: nationality -> \[the ADJ\]Np L ? people of that nationality 
e.g. The French nation. / The French have objected to this. 
also Swiss, Dutch, Chinese, Spanish etc. 
(11) 
LIR Produce Young 
NC: animal young -> VI: produce young 
e.g. It's a foal. / The mare will foal shortly. 
also cub, pup, whelp, lamb etc. 
(12) 
LIR Feeling - Evoking (13) 
ADJ: (of subject) feeling an emotion -> ADJ: (of cause) evoking that emotion 
e.g. She's sad about it. / It was a sad day. 
also happy, angry, nostalgic, melancholy etc. 
LIR 
NC: 
e.g. 
also 
Cutter - Cut 
tool for cutting/piercing -> VTI: to use that tool on 
Where's the knife? / She tried to knife me. 
saw, bayonet, spear, axe, harpoon etc. 
(14) 
LIR 
NC: 
e.g 
also 
Food Item - Mass 
food item -> NU: food substance 
Here's an egg. / He won't eat egg. 
potato, lettuce, banana, coconut, haggis, sausage, pie etc. 
(15) 
LIRs are distinguished invarious ways from some comparable phenomena 
discussed in the literature: 
78 
1. They are more systematic than the Lexical Network framework used by Norvig 
to link the remoter senses of take in Norvig & Lakoff (1987); cf also Norvig 
(1989). 
2. Each implication instance has a single clear base form. In this they are unlike 
the semantic alternations arising from the metaphorical concepts uch as "argument 
is war" or "communication is a conduit" of Lakoff & Johnson (1980) and Sweetser 
(1990), which are often better epresented asprojections from one network of 
semantic relations on to an isomorphic one. 
3. They do not depend on special background knowledge, unlike many of the 
innovative denominals of Clark & Clark (1979) (e.g.We all Wayned and Cagneyed 
).2 
4. They are not coerced by a governing head, unlike the instances of contextual 
determination (three martinis ago, before the jet engine) pointed out by Fillmore 
(p.c.). 
3. Formal Definition of LIRs 
The form of an LIR may be given schematically asfollows, using Cruse's 
terminology (cf Cruse 1986): 
A lexical unit LU1, consisting of a lexical component LC1 (consisting of 
phonological, orthographic, morphological nd syntactic information) and a 
semantic omponent SC1, implies the existence of a lexical unit LU2, with lexical 
component LC1 or LC2 and semantic omponent SC2. 
More graphically: 
(i) LC l \ [ . . .a . . . \ ]  : SC 1 \ [ . . . t~.. . \ ] - -> LC 1 \ [ . . .a. . . \ ]  : SC 2 \[...x...\] 
or  
(j) LC 1 \[...a...\] : SC 1 \[...~...\] --> LC 2 \[...0~...\] : SC 2 \[...'t...\] 
This means that within our definition of LIRs are included all defivational rules, 
since these always affect he sense of their input-word. 
Note that, on this theory, LIRs may alter the lexical component of an input word, 
but they must alter its semantic omponent. The formal change brought about by an 
LIR may be vacuous, but the semantic hange can never be. LIRs, therefore, on 
our conception, are centrally concerned with semantics, but only incidentally with 
formal transformations. Hence, for example, the many lexical processes in 
English which involve transition from a count noun to a mass noun (e.g. Tree - 
Wood; Animal - Fur; Animal - Meat; Food Item - Mass) will be viewed as 
distinct LIRs. 
The arrow in the LIR-schema makes it clear that LIRs are viewed as denvational 
processes, not as symmetrical relations. The claim is made that each implication 
instance has a single clear base form. 3 This is not an idle claim, but is in fact 
2Historically many LIRs may have begun as post-hoc generalizations ver such "contextual" 
innovations. 
3This accords with Aronoffs principle of Word-based Morphology (1976). 
79 
supported by the facts adduced to show the conditions under which LIRs are 
blocked (viz by Pre-emption, and by Formally- and Semantically-Based 
Exceptions, as exhibited below). Such constraints on the application of a rule 
block the existence of a potential output for a given input. Without clear 
directionality in the LIRs that are blocked, such constraints would be meaningless, 
or at least unspecific in their effect. 
4. Our Database and its Usefulness in Lexicography. The R61e of Theory. 
Created (by Atkins) in an effort o systematize and accelerate he process of 
dictionary compiling, the database draws on the relationships discussed by Fillmore 
(e.g. 1969, 1978 and elsewhere) ; Apresjan's cases of regularpolysemy (1973); 
Leech's emantic transfer rules (1981); the verb alternations oted in Levin 
(forthcoming); the cases of systematic polysemy discussed in Miller (1978), Clark 
& Clark (1979), Aronoff (1980) and Lehrer (1990); items participating in the cross- 
language l xicalizafion patterns which Talmy discusses (1985); the nom/nal 
compounds analysed by Levi (1982); and Pustejovsky's generative l xicon 
(1991). 
The database is far from complete. It consists at present of a dBaselII Plus file, of 
which each of the 130 records holds information on one particular type of 
systematic meaning shift, and separate lists (as complete as possible) of the sets of 
words which participate ineach type, and those which might be expected to, but do 
not. 
At present the lists of words which participate in the various identified meaning 
shifts may be used to remind a lexicographer that a particular word is expected to 
have certain specified usages, and to structure in advance certain aspects of the 
dictionary entry accordingly. In lexicography, when teams of a dozen or so people 
work on producing for one dictionary consistent descriptions of 100,000 or more 
words, such preparatory marking of items in the wordlist already makes the 
compiling faster and more consistent across members of the team. The computer 
can present them with an appropriate pro-forma entry to complete, rather than their 
having to compile ach word from scratch. 
But besides these pragmatic aims, we are also concerned to clarify the theoretical 
status of the various types of meaning shift. Success here will allow rules to be 
formulated more accurately and comprehensively. In addition, by illuminating the 
semantic primitives which play a r61e in the rules, it should also lead towards 
standardization f the semantic component of lexical entries. 
We now turn to the evidence for LIRs as linguistic rules. 
5. Formal Properties of LIRs - I: Pre-emption 
Pre-emption is the prevention of application of a rule because the place for its output 
is, in some way, already taken. 4 We have noted two kinds of pre-emption 
blocking LIRs: semantic pre-emption, where the sense is already represented by a 
4pre-emption is explicitly noted in this context by Clark & Clark (1979: p. 798). Cf also 
Gruber (1976: 295-6). These, however, only note the phenomenon of what we call semantic pre- 
emption. 
80 
different word; and lexicalpre-emption, where the word has already been assigned 
a different sense. 
Semantic Pre-emption 
(i) 
Hunting Plural is blocked by the pre-existence of the collective plural noun cattle 
: *they're out after ox/cow/bull/bullock. 
(ii) 
Vehicle Verb is blocked by the existence of special-purpose v rbs drive, sail, fly 
(even if these are not strictly accurate statements of the power-source involved): 
*we carted/boated/planed home. 
(iii) 
Animal Meat is pre-empted by the Anglo-Norman terms beef, mutton, pork, veal 
venison : *have some more gravy on your bullock/sheep/pig/calf/deer. 
(iv) 
Power Source Attribute is pre-empted by the adjective lectric :
*electricity motor/power/light. 
Lexical Pre-emption 
Dance Verb is blocked in the case of reel because the verb form that would result 
is already there with a different meaning, viz "to stagger, as from a shock". Hence 
it is not available to mean "do the (Highland) reel": *the party reeled the night away. 
Although pre-emption of these kinds does appear to be a sufficient condition, and 
hence good evidence, for a semantic shift's being an LIR, it is not apparently a 
necessary one: sometimes it fails to work where LIRs do seem to be involved. 
For instance, -ful Derived Noun creates Contents and Amount senses, sometimes 
on the basis of quite unpromising nouns: belly -> a bellyful of rice & beans, cap - 
> a capful of disinfectant,fist -> a fistful of dollars, hand -> a handful of dust, 
needle -> a needleful of cotton, pocket -> a pocketful of rye, shovel -> a shovelful 
of spaghetti, spade -> a spadeful of earth, spoon -> a spoonful of sugar etc. 
However, the rule also applies to 'true' Container nouns (words whose primary 
sense is a hyponym of container): bottle... -> bottleful, bucketful, cupful glassful 
potful, sackful, tankful, thimbleful. In these applications, the rule's semantic effect 
seems to be indistinguishable from that of Container - Amount/Contents. 
Nonetheless, this latter is not pre-empted e.g. he drank the whole bottle(ful); the 
pail holds eight bottle(ful)s of milk. 5 
Another case of failed pre-emption concerns the LIR Material  Adjective. This rule 
which allows the names of materials to be used as adjectives to describe objects 
made of the material is unaffected by the application of the somewhat sporadic -en 
Derived Adjective rule. 
E.g.,  
a gold ring vs. a golden ring 
a silk shirt vs. a silken shirt 
an oak chest vs. an oaken chest 
a leather bottle vs. a leathern bottle 
5There must be an LIR involved here, and not just a vagueness in the sense of "container nouns": 
the senses Amount and Contents are clearly distinct from the sense Container. To show this it is 
enough to point out that nouns like handful and bottleful have the senses Amount and Contents 
but not the sense Container. 
81 
but 
a silver ring vs. *a silvern ring 
a hair shirt vs. *a hairen shirt 
a teak chest vs. *a teaken chest 
a rubber bottle vs. *a rubbern bottle 6
For the moment it is enough to point out that pre-emption is not always clear-cut 
and co-ercive. Where it is present, however, it indicates clearly the presence of an 
LIR. 
Pre-emption proper, however, should be distinguished from what we might call 
pragmatic exclusion. These are cases where a predicted application of a rule is 
blocked because of external fact about the world. Compounding with place-names 
can imply Source as well as DestinationT: e.g. When is the London train due in? (= 
"train from London") vs. When is the London train due to leave? (="train for 
London"). However, the Source option seems trangely to be excluded for roads. 
"The London road" means the road to London, not away from it. The paradox 
goes away when one considers the point of view of road users. Either they are in 
London, or they are not. If they are, then every road they might take is a road from 
London; talking about "the London road" in this sense is of little use to them. If 
they are somewhere else, then every road from London is co-extensive with a road 
to London: why bother to distinguish? Both sets of road-users can be kept happy if 
the convention is adopted that "London road" = "road to London". 
6. Formal  Properties of  L IRs - 2: Formal ly-Based Except ions 
Certain constraints on particular LIRs are quite formal. They have to do with non- 
semantic aspects of the lexical items involved, principally their phonological form, 
but also their morphological or syntactic sub-category. Such examples provide 
perhaps the clearest evidence that LIRs are not an effect of pragmatic attempts to use 
words tersely and interpret them constructively. 
Phonological Exceptions 
(i) 
Constitut ion - State provides quite generally for mass nouns designating types of 
government toact as count nouns designating states under such government. 
Hence there is democracy, tyranny, dictatorship, oligarchy, and there are 
democracies, tyrannies, dictatorships, oligarchies. 8 However, there is one large 
class of nouns, those ending in -ism, for which this LIR is blocked: there are no 
*fascisms, *communisms, *nazisms, *totalitarianisms, *marxisms, *leninisms, 
6Evidently, there is vagueness inthe precise definition of the two processes concerned. Some 
would say the adjectives in -(e)n are moving away from their original meaning "made of" to 
something vaguer such as "redolent of"; others that he outputs of Material Adjective are not 
really adjectives, but just compound uses of the original nouns. There are tests that bear on these 
points but the results are variable and inconclusive. 
7Obviously, these possibilities are not exhaustive. 
8Some types of r6gime have no corresponding term for a theory of government: e.g. republic, 
kingdom, dukedom, heptarchy. This is because not all r6gime-terms are derived from terms for 
political theories (contrast monarchy (which is) with kingdom (which is not)). In other cases, 
the possibility of a corresponding r6gime is only pragmatically excluded : politics, not grammar, 
precludes anarchies, bureaucracies and officialdoms. 
82 
*stalinisms or *maoisms, although it is quite clear which states would have been 
candidates for such titles. 9 
(ii) 
Nationality Plural allows for nationality adjectives, when preceded by the definite 
article, to also function as terms for a plural noun, referring to a given group of, or 
to all people of, that nationality. Strangely, however, the rule is subject o a 
phonological restriction: only terms ending in a sibilant consonant are eligible. So 
we may refer to the Swiss, the Spanish, the Dutch, the French, the Japanese, but 
not (as a collective plural) to *the Belgian, *the German, *the Coptic, *the Iraqi or 
*the Malay. 10 
Morphological Exception 
Produce Young provides for the use of any name of a young mammal as a verb 
to denote the giving of birth to such an animal. Thus cows calve 11, mares foal, 
ewes lamb, vixens cub, dogs whelp, cats litter, sows farrow, seals pup, and does 
fawn. However, the rule excepts diminutives: kitten, piglet and puppy form no 
verbs. 12 
Syntactic Exception 
Feeling - Evoking applies to adjectives, converting an attribute of a person feeling 
an emotion to that of any object causing the emotion. It appears to be systematically 
blocked from applying to any adjective which is only used preedicatively. Hence we 
have the following contrasts: 
a happy child 
*a glad child 
: the child is happy 
:: a happy occasion 
: the child is glad 
:: *a glad occasion 
: the occasion is happy 
: *the occasion is glad 
a fearful child 
*an afraid child 
: the child is fearful 
:: a fearful occasion 
: the child is afraid 
::*an afraid occasion 
: the occasion is fearful 
:*the occasion is afraid 
a unhealthy child 
*an ill child 
: the child is unhealthy 
:: a unhealthy occasion : the occasion is unhealthy 
: the child is ill 
::*an ill occasion :*the occasion is ill 
a rapt child : the child is rapt 
:: a rapt occasion 
*an agog child : the child is agog : 
:*an agog occasion 
: ?the occasion is rapt 
:*the occasion is agog 
9An exception to the constraint isdespotism, especially in the usage oriental despotism. 
10Non-naturalized names are another, perhaps semantic, exception. The Hausa, the Wolof, the 
Konkani, the Tuareg strike this writer at least as acceptable collective plurals. Interestingly, too, 
the Maya seem OK, while the Inca and Chibcha re not. 
11Th e verb calve instead of the expected *calf is a mild case of pre-emption i Modem 
English. The voicing-alternation, however, was once regular, and is merely evidence that he 
origins of this LIR go back at least o Middle English. 
12Though, as the examples show, these could also be excluded by pre-emption. 
83 
7. Formal Properties of LIRs - 3: Semantically-Based Exceptions 
Beside these uncanny exceptions to LIRs based on features of the word-forms 
involved, LIRs are also subject o systematic exceptions which pick on features of 
the sense. In drawing attention to them, we notice some surprisingly intricate 
structure in the lexicon. 
Cutter Cut enables nouns representing cutting instruments obe used as verbs. 
So people can be knifed, bayoneted, speared, harpooned, axed, tomahawked, or
scythed own; various tools can scissor, drill or saw through material. Why then 
do sword, dagger and their hyponyms take no part in this verbal carnage? Why is 
it impossible to speak of *swording, *daggering, *poniarding, *bodkinning, 
*rapiering, *scimitaring, *sabring, *stilettoing, *claymoring or whatever else one 
might do to an adversary with a specific bladed weapon? It begins to look like 
more than an accident, since there are plenty of non-derived verbs to cover, in less 
specific ways, the stabbing, slashing, chopping, hacking, pricking and piercing 
actions that would be connoted. 
Another strangely coherent semantic onstraint is on Food Item - Mass. This 
allows a count noun for food to appear as a mass noun when the units of that food 
are not evident. Hence although the primary meaning of the nouns is the discrete 
animal, fruit or vegetable, one can nevertheless refer to some egg, some crab, 
some salmon, some potato, some carrot, some apple, some cabbage tc., connoting 
a mass of the relevant food substance typically on a plate. Only one form of food 
seems to resist: pulses. No matter how finely you grind or mash them, you cannot 
refer to "*some pea", "*some bean", "*some lentil". Refried beans are still beans, 
not bean. Neither of the authors is a native user of garbanzo (a North American 
name for chickpea), but we would predict hat you cannot have a side-dish of 
garban zo. 13 
8. Formal Properties of LIRs - 4: Specificity to Language, and to Dialect 
Further evidence comes from cases where an LIR appears to be present in one 
language, but not in another. 
The form of the argument is quite simple: consider two languages (for the sake of 
argument, called A and B) and two sets of words, apparently translation equivalents 
one for one between the two languages. Suppose that the members of the set in A 
all have an extra sense which members of the set in B lack. Such cases are clear 
evidence of that the assignment of senses is language-dependent; a d the facts are 
explained by positing an LIR to be present in A and not in B. The only alternative 
would be to appeal to pragmatic interpretation f the context. 14 But pragrnatics i
a species of commonsense: it cannot explain why the interpretation of vocabulary 
differs systematically from one speech-community to another. 
13The historical situation here seems alittle-muddled, since pea is a singularized hack-formation 
from pease, originally a mass-noun meaning peas. This itself seems to have been a reanalysis of 
a descendant of an originally plural noun in Latin, pisa. In modern Indian English, dal is used 
quite happily as a mass-noun for a different son of pulses. 
14As, for example, Aronoff (1980: pp.755-7) attempts oexplain away the need for specific 
details in rules of morphological semantics by appealing to features of the context in 
interpretation. His argument is significantly weakened by cases where languages with close 
morphological processes (e.g. agent nouns in English and French) apparently show quite different 
constraints on their interpretation: e.g. c'est un bon conducteur has no sense synonymous with 
the simple il conduit bien ; but cf. he's a good driver = he drives well. 
84 
An example may make the point clearer. In Ancient Greek, there is a set of 
adjectives (clearly marked as such morphologically) which associate their head- 
noun with a particular time of day. ( E.g. eo:os - at dawn, early; orthr ios - in the 
morning; mese:mbr inos  - at noon; dei l inos - in the afternoon; hesper ios - in the 
evening; nukteros - at night; mesonukt ios - at midnight; pannukh ios  - all night 
long). English also has such a set of adjectives but they are few, and confined to a 
learned register (e.g. matutinal ,  nocturnal  ); the major translation equivalents in
English are attributive uses of nouns (e.g. morn ing  papers ,  noon-day  sun, 
afternoon tea etc.). Ancient Greek goes on to use its temporal adjectives 
predicatively, with the sense of adverbial qualifiers of the action predicated: 
e.g. 
orthrios he:ko:n - coming in the morning (Plato, Protagoras 313B) 
egre:i mese:mbrinos - you wake at noon (Aristophanes, Wasps 774) 
eudon pannukhioi - they slept all night long (Homer, Iliad 2.2) 
Evidently, there is no such predicative use of English temporal adjectives or nouns: 
prepositional phrases (as used above in the glosses) are the closest hat can be 
offered. 15 
Hence there is an adverbial sense of Greek temporal adjectives, used predicatively, 
which has no parallel in English. A neat formulation of the case would thus be to 
formulate an Ancient Greek LIR, absent in English, which goes: 
LIR Time Predication (16) 
ADJ : temporal, ?p(head-NP) -> ADJ predicative: temporal, t~(head-S) 16 
To avoid positing an LIR here would take some special pleading. In this case one 
would need to argue that the distinction of senses made in English is simply absent 
in Greek, so that temporal adjectives are available to do more promiscuous service. 
This would amount o saying that Ancient Greek simply made no linguistic 
distinction between assigning a time-reference to an action and assigning a time- 
reference to the agent of that action. 
However, our point here is not to argue for a specific analysis of the Greek facts. It 
is simply to point out that sense-shifts of the type that LIRs represent are sometimes 
language-specific. Either we can encapsulate he differences in a single LIR, 
present in language A, absent in B. Or else we can posit a different assignment of
semantic primitives, with B being systematically stricter in the senses allowed for 
a given class of words (-- in this case, English will not allow its temporal 
adjectives to assign a time-reference to a whole action). Either way, we shall have 
gained some concrete vidence on linguistic semantics. What we are not free to 
claim is that pragmatic considerations alone can resolve such systematic differences 
between languages. 
A similar cross-linguistic argument for the linguistic reality of LIRs can be made 
from dialectal differences within the same language. 
Consider for example the treatment of "day-nouns" in Standard British English as 
against their treatment invarious other dialects, including Cockney and General 
American. Whereas the indexical nouns today, tonight, yesterday, tomorrow occur 
as adverbs in all dialects, the days of the week Sunday  through Saturday cannot 
15And these in fact have precise translation equivalents, using prepositions, in Ancient Greek. 
16~X) here represents he syntactic unit of whose sense the adjective's sense is predicated. 
85 
occur adverbially in Standard British English: he came *(on) Tuesday. To account 
for this, one could posit an LIR Day Noun - Adverb, with a more restricted 
domain in Standard British English than in the other dialects. 
But to posit this is already to accept that the LIR is a feature of the grammar of 
English. Contrastive analysis, whether applying within a language or between 
languages, will, we expect, continue to raise a host of problems for any approach 
which tries to account for the fine detail of semantics as side-effects of pragmafics. 
The real world, and the human condition, is not so different from one language- 
community to another (let alne between dialect-areas). But as languages and their 
grammars differ, so does their lexical semantics. 
References 
Aronoff, Mark (1976) Word Formation in Generative Grammar, LI Monograph 
1, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, USA. 
Aronoff, Mark (1980) Contextuals, Language 56:4, pp. 744-758. 
Apresjan, Ju.D. (1973) Regular Polysemy, Linguistics 142, Mouton, The Hague, 
NL. 
Bresnan, Joan (1982) (ed.) The Mental Representation f Grammatical Relations, 
MIT Press, Cambridge MA, USA. 
Clark, E.V. & H.H. Clark (1979) When nouns surface as verbs, Language 55:4, 
pp. 767-811. 
Cruse, D.A. (1986) Lexical Semantics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 
Fillmore, C.J. (1969) Types of lexical information, pp. 109-137 in F. Kiefer ed., 
Studies in Syntax and Semantics, Reidel, Dordrecht, NL. 
Fillmore, C.J. (1978) On the organization of semantic information i  the lexicon, 
Parasession on the Lexicon, Chicago Linguistic Society, University of Chicago, 
USA. 
Gruber, Jeffrey (1976) Lexical structures in syntax and semantics. North- 
Holland, Amsterdam, NL. 
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson (1980) Metaphors We Live By, University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, USA. 
Leech, Geoffrey (1981) Semantics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Lehrer, Adrienne (1990) Polysemy, conventionality and the structure of the 
lexicon. Cognitive Linguistics 1.2, pp. 207-246. 
Levi, Judith N. (1982) Complex Nominals: New Discoveries, New Questions. 
Proceedings of the Xlllth International Congress of Linguists, Tokyo, pp. 183- 
197 
86 
Levin, Beth (forthcoming) Towards a Lexical Organization of English Verbs, 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA. 
Miller, George A. (1978) Semantic Relations Among Words, pp. 60-117 in M. 
Halle et al ed. Linguistic Theory and Psychological Reality, MIT Press, 
Cambridge MA, USA. 
Norvig, Peter (1989) Building a Large Lexicon with Lexical Network Theory. 
Proceedings of the First International Language Acquisition Workshop, Detroit, 
USA. 
Norvig, Peter & George Lakoff (1987) Taking: a study in Lexical Network Theory 
Proceedings of the 13th Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, pp. 195-205. 
Pustejovsky, James (1991) The Generative Lexicon, Computational Linguistics 
17. 
Sweetser, E. (1990) From etymology topragmatics: metaphorical nd cultural 
aspects of semantic structure, Cambridge University Press, UK. 
Talmy, Leonard (1985) Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in lexical forms, 
in T. Shopen ed., Language typology and syntactic description. Volume 3: 
Grammatical categories and the lexicon, Cambridge University Press, UK. 
87 
