Lexical and World Knowledge: Theoretical and Applied Viewpoints 
John S. White 
PRC Inc. 
1500 Planning Research Drive 
McLean VA 22102 
(703) 556-1899 
white_john@po.gis.prc.com 
Three discussion points are addressed from two perspectives: that of an anthropological 
tradition in cognitive science, and that of application--oriented natural language processing. 
From the cognitive perspective, knowledge of the world is not as influenced by linguistic 
semantics as we are tempted to think. From the applied NLP perspective, the distinction 
between world and lexical knowledge can be determined practically on the basis of what is 
needed for the computational task. 
139 
Lexical and World Knowledge: Theoretical and Applied Viewpoints 
This position paper expresses two perspectives to the issue of the relationship of lexical 
semantics and knowledge representation, one from a flavor of cognitive science and 
another from the applied orientation to natural language processing (NLP). The 
perspectives are very different in their effects: this variety of cognitive science is highly 
bound to how humans categorize an arguably continuous universe; that variety of NLP is 
devoted to how to make machines "do" language understanding just well enough to 
perform some delimitable tasks automatically. The contrasts in the positions are obvious in 
terms of fidelity to how it is that humans must actually organize their worlds and their 
lexicons. But there is a significant similarity as well, in that, once a fervently held view 
about determinism is expressed, it is possible to exploit he boundaries between lexical and 
world knowledge for both the ends of cognitive science and NLP, without exactly 
knowing what those boundaries are. 
The original gauntlet thrown for the Siglex workshop was a series of questions which 
raise the relevant theoretical nd applied issues for determining the difference between types 
of knowledge, the use of one for the determination f the other, and cross-cultural 
correlates of knowledge-representation/lexical representation phenomena. This paper uses 
three of these as a springboard (or better soapbox) for presenting my views on the Sapir- 
Whorf hypothesis (that is, the various deterministic positions on perception, cognition, and 
language structure). It is hoped that this such expression will be preaching to the choir, 
though it is possible that it will not be. Upon the expression of those views, however, I 
am more at liberty to show how, on the one hand, cultural knowledge helps solve lexical 
problems, and on the other, how useful exical organizations are as expressions of world 
knowledge because they can be exploited efficiently. 
The three discussion points are addressed here are the methods of determining the scope 
of lexical knowledge, cross linguistic evidence for lexical specificity, and implemented 
systems to lexical/non-lexical knowledge. Rather than a serial exposition of these, 
however, they are organized at the highest level by the methodological issue, treating the 
cross cultural perspective as a subordinate issue via the treatment of a cultural/lexical 
problem in anthropology, and then the implemented systems as examples of 
methodological practicalities. 
1.0. Lexicai and extra-lexicai methodologies. From the human language 
point of view, there are intuitive tests in ordinary linguistic behavior for determining lexical 
and non-lexical knowledge. Among the variety of real and imagined failings of our 
children, for example, we do not accuse them of being unable to speak their native 
language, or, if we do, it is not because they do not know the capital of Korea (and thus 
occasionally miss the point of some utterance about where Reeboks come from). This 
judgment indicates that there is a boundary somewhere, and is probably asuitable first step 
in developing a usable linguistic methodology, one consistent with the way linguistic 
judgments are done. Another method involves performing cognitive tests on bilinguals 
and monolinguals in the same cultural setting (which begs numerous questions); the 
apparent similarities in organizing behavior among should in principle be the influence of 
world knowledge alone, and the differences possibly of language influence (to the limits 
expressed rather abundantly both above and below). This experiment is on the face of it 
too difficult to control; we seek a more bounded set of methods in the same spirit. 
140 
The next discussions beg the question of f'mding the boundary itself, but clearly exploit he 
boundary. First, the boundary between cultural belief and lexicon is used to determine the 
lexemic status of a morpheme in Tojolabal-Maya. Secondly, several examples in 
machine-readable dictionary work are discussed to show how these can be used self- 
consciously to represent both the lexical and conceptual organization necessary for natural 
language processing tasks as they are currently applied. 
1.1. Lexicai/cultural interactions and Sapir-Whorf. The following addresses 
the issues of cross-cultural perspectives on lexical/world knowledge within the context of 
the methodological issues, and in turn addresses linguistic determinism problems that arise 
whenever terminological structures are hypothesized to be related to the way people think 
about he world. 
1.1.1. Tojolabal evil eye. In the study of the lexical semantics of Tojolabal-Maya 
(an indigenous language of the highlands of Chiapas, Mexico) I discovered a set of 
phenomena associated with the indigenous belief of "evil eye" which apparently shed light 
on the lexical unity of what seemed to be several homophonous words (White 1979). It 
was notable that many of the objects in the world associated with evil eye were expressed 
by (or counted by) the same Tojolabal string, which heretofore was regarded as several 
different, homophonous words. 
The Tojolabal word sat has a broad range of translations. It occurs in two parts of speech 
(noun and numeral classifier), and can mean "eye," "face," "top surface," and (as a 
classifier) apiece of fruit,the sky, a word, or a coin. It is tempting, especially because of 
the apparent divergence inpart of speech to regard the different sense of sat to be associated 
with different lexical items, and I had happily done just that until the people told me about 
the full extent of effects of the evil eye. Typically, you can infect a child with evil eye by 
pointing at its face (you are hereby advised against i ), but one also causes fruit on the tree 
to rot by pointing at it. Meanwhile, involving your finger with the sky (pointing at the 
moon or a rainbow or counting the stars) will get you warts, and carrying a coin will 
prevent the dangerous effects of looking at a corpse. The interaction of the affectors and 
affecteds in these scenarios, along with the behavior of "ripe" and "unripe" objects, led to 
an observation that reducing that sat's to one also reduced the number of formulas for evil 
eye. This fact supports the hypothesis that there is one lexical entry sat in Tojolabal 
lexicon, from which the several referents are results of extension processes. 
1.1.2. The relevance of Sapir-WhorL Such investigation of cultural belief 
complexes and their relationship to the lexical semantics of the language spoken by that 
culture comes perilously close to raising the issues of influence of the one over the other, 
and in particular the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. It seems intuitively reasonable to suppose, 
as the anthropologists of the early 20th century did, that the specificity by which a class of 
objects is lexicalized has to do with the cultural relevance of the concepts associated with 
that. Surely the the number of lexemes used to discriminate among classes and subclasses 
of thing must, at least much of the time, be affected by the importance of that category to a 
particular endeavor (e.g., breeders know more words for dogs than do non-breeders) But 
this presumes the primacy of the lexeme, that we categorize more where we have more 
unique words within the category. As we will discuss below, there are universal properties 
of taxonomic classes, internal to the lexical system itself, such as genericity, 
primary/secondary lexemes, expression of "truest" member, and so on (Berlin et al, 
op.cit.). However, none of these properties automatically say anything about people's 
ability to conceive of, or perceive, the object/idea itself. 
141 
The classic examples are found in cross-linguistic color terminology. What happens in 
languages where primary lexemic terms are quite restricted (e.g., only a black, white, red, 
and blue color word), is rather like what happens when I enter a paint store: the lack of 
terms does not reflect knowledge of the world nor perceived istinctions in color. Of 
course, speaking with people whose language does not have a lexemic distinction between 
blue and green reveals that there is no trouble at all circumlocuting toexpress the perceived 
distinction between the "blue/green" of grass and the "blue/green" of the sky, and other 
distinctions finer still. Relatively recent work by Kay and Kempton (1984) carried this 
observation to more empirical evels, to dispel the Whorfian claim that lack of a 
terminological distinction would change the perception of the boundaries between colors 
(the paper also is a good source for discussion of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis). 
Thus I reject he extremes of Sapir-Whorf interpretations (and the magic and perhaps elf- 
exculpation i herent in any deterministic theory), and maintain instead the more pedestrian 
view that humans transcend all sorts of constraints, including the strictures of language and 
its lexical systems. This position allows a characterization f the specificity of lexical- 
semantic ategories in cross-linguistic comparison, but does not immediately allow us to 
know what its relationship to world knowledge might be. For now, I resort to the 
explanation provided by Kay and Kempton, that lexical structure gives a channel for 
perception and cognition, barring other evidence or more convenient channels. To this 
extent, and no further, then, specificity in the lexicon influences world knowledge 
organization, and vice versa. 
Returning to the Tojolabal case, it is tempting to suspect that the association of concepts 
under evil eye was influenced by the lexical unity of sat  (i.e., supporting the Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis as commonly put forth), there really is no grounds for that position any more 
than the opposite position (that he strength of the belief system maintained the integrity of 
the reference of the lexical item). Thus the phenomenon was neutral with respect o the 
influence of language on perception/cognition. 
1.2. Natural Language Processing Methodologies. 
As has been hinted at already, the distinction between what is and is not lexical knowledge 
can be visited practically. The distinction hopefully reduces to that between what is the 
least you have to know in order to do the work your lexicon has set you up to do in NLP, 
and what can you get away with excluding. To whatever extent one can present world 
knowledge in an algorithmic way that is perhaps the same way that you represent lexical 
knowledge for those purposes with precisely those same limitations (I refer to feature/value 
pairs, however computationally represented), one does it. To the greatest extent possible, 
we reduce world knowledge to lexical (and maybe syntactic) differences caused by 
"domain" or "sublanguage" and code those difference as if lexical, and segregate these 
entries in sub-dictionaries. The discussion of NLP systems necessarily involves the 
workshop issue of theoretical pproaches and implemented systems and their methods of 
combining lexical and non-lexical knowledge. 
Successfully implemented NLP systems do combine lexical and world knowledge together 
at some stage of their operations. The actual decision as to which component certain 
knowledge should go depends more on software engineering, human factors, and 
efficiency issues than on capturing the natural inguistic/knowledge boundary. This is 
almost regrettable, xcept hat the realization allows us a clearer segregation among systems 
which are intended to model human behavior for its own sake, and those which are 
destined to take advantage of task and domain boundaries to do a particular job. It is 
frequently argued that no such boundaries exist, that any discourse will be bound up in 
142 
world knowledge without which it cannot be interpreted completely. And I agree: 
differentiating between the two senses of "speaker" is only helped slightly by verb case 
role assignments, and hardly at all by domain delimitations (e.g., telephony) via specialized 
dictionaries. In implemented systems, the choice in correctly translating or otherwise 
processing "speaker" may lie between ad hoc feature value assignments (with concomitant 
loss of maintainability) and punting (letting the human disambiguate it at some point in the 
process). The criterion for judging success in these, however, is efficiency and acceptance 
by users/operators, criteria which are influenced by many factors beyond just the 
correctness of the knowledge representation. 
1.2.1 Machine Readable Dictionary Taxonomies. The archetypal work in the 
computational manipulation of lexical structures i  Robert Amsler's work in developing 
taxonomic structures from machine readable dictionaries. As is probably well known 
(Amsler 1980, Amsler and White 1979), Amsler used the ISA links expressed by the 
format of the dictionary entry between the word defined and the syntactic heads of the 
definition to build recursive, transitive taxonomic structures. Among a great many things 
that were discovered in that project was that there were principled ways to determine 
hidden structural information about he lexical hierarchies. Several of these principles were 
quite similar to those derived in the discipline of cognitive science called ethnosemantics. 
Much work in this branch of anthropology emerged in the 1960's and early 1970's as 
attempts to design knowledge acquisition methods which could elicit culturally relevant 
organizing principles from informants without imposing the investigators own organizing 
principles. A landmark study by Berlin et al (1974) had concluded that there were 
universal generalizations that could be drawn about how people categorize taxonomically, 
that categories of generalities in reference could be correlated with lexical expression. 
Thus in botanical taxonomies, it was observed that there are "levels" of organization that 
could be discovered by the lexemic status of the words occurring at various levels of 
generality n the taxonomic structure. Lexemic status in turn concerns whether the node 
labels are "primary" ("pool", "dog", "terrier") or secondary ("whirlpool", "wire-haired 
terrier") and whether a node at a particular level can actually go without a label. "Covert 
categ.ories", as these unlabelled sets are called, were predicted to be able to occur only at 
certain points in the taxonomic structure. 
In ethnosemantic methodology, covert categories are indicated when a great number of 
words with relatively specific referents eem to be defined by the informant as "a kind of" 
something very general. An analogous phenomenon occurred in the generation of 
taxonomic structures from machine readable dictionaries, in, of all places, botanical 
terminology. In the Merriam-Webster Modem Pocket Dictionary used in the Amsler work, 
specific plant varieties are often defined as "a plant related to the X's .... ", 
as in "agave (Any of several spiny-leaved plants related to the amaryllis)", "hellebore (a 
poisonous plant related to the lilies...") (G&C Merriam, 1971). Along with the 
proliferation of very specific - to- very general links, clues such as the regularity of "related 
to" tip us off to covert categories, nodes on the taxonomy which have no overt label 
expressed by the direct ISA relation. Figures 1 and 2 respectively show a relatively messy 
tree generated by the ISA relation as manifest between an entry word and the head of its 
definition text, and the same tree with the imposed covert categories revealed by the 
expression "related to." 
143 
PLANT 2.1A 
HE 
ANISE C ............ 
Figure 1. Partial "Plant" taxonomy derived from head terms alone 
PLANT 2.1A 
HERB.1A SHRUB.OA 
< T H E n  
TREE 1.1A 
ANISE <THE LILIES> 
CARAWAY LILY 
CELERY TULIP 
DILL GARLIC 
FENNEL HYACINTH 
HEMLOCK ASPARAGUS 
<THE DAISIES> 
DAISY 
FLEABANE 
CORNFLOWER 
ARTICHOKE 
COSMOS 
ZINNIA 
DAHLIA 
Figure 2. Taxonomy augmented with covert categories ("related to") 
144 
There was a continuing temptation to regard higher levels of the hierarchy as somehow 
transcendant of the language from which they were elicited, i.e., to have become 
knowledge representations whose nodes were labelled in an English-like meta-language. 
In part, this temptation arose out of the labels themselves, ince such words as "cause", 
"thing", etc. were at the tree tops. At the time, I resisted because of the anthropological 
position already noted. However, I have since come to the healthier realization that the 
lexical structure can serve as domain knowledge for practical purposes. I address this 
further below. 
1.2.2. Multi-lingual Lexical Structures. Later work with machine readable 
dictionaries used such lexical structures, not as knowledge representation models, but 
rather to transfer in levels of generality between two different languages, given two 
monolingual dictionaries and one bilingual which joined the two (White 1989). The means 
of transfer between one language and another (though not, of course, translation) was a 
matter of finding the fit for disambiguation one side, (using relatively undifferentiated 
collocational cues from the definition texts) and then transferring languages in an essentially 
word-for-word algorithm. 
The relations impose two dimensions: the ISA one between the entry term and the sense- 
definition head, and the relation (simply collocational) between the defining head and the 
other words in the definition. Obviously there are more things expressed in the definition 
text than just these two relations. But even this much avoids imposition of relations that are 
not actually in the dictionary. The eollocational words have their own ISA links to other 
words, and their own (non-reflexive) collocational links as well. Thus it is possible to 
traverse lexical structures both hierarchically (ISA links) and laterally (collocation). 
Heretofore, it had only been advisable to build taxonomic structures from general 
dictionaries, ince every term in a definition is also defined, assuring some sort of closure. 
With the addition of the collocational dimension, however vaguely defined, it is possible to 
"graft" non-general dictionaries (technical, special purpose, bilingual) onto the existing 
general structures by matching collocations in to the non-generals to collocations in the 
specifics. The next step, for a Siemens translation databank experiment (both technical and 
multi-lingual) was to map such glossaries into dual general purpose dictionaries (one for 
each language). By this means generality could be traversed and collocations pursued to 
meet a broad range of application possibilities, including data extraction i to one language 
from free-form text in another. 
Figure 3 represents a grown link between a technical English glossary, a corresponding 
German one, and the general dictionaries in between from which the general links among 
collocates can be grown. 
Figure 3. relational links across multi.lingual structures 
The elaboration of elicited relations into a structure, even a two dimensional one of the 
explicit ISA and collocafional ssociations, can be employed to disambiguate free text, and 
extract information from that text with minimal natural language processing. The MRD- 
145 
Tree Generation 
Device .1F (for,indicating,number, 
amount) 
Counter 2.0B (gas-filled,operate,conditions,magnitude, 
pulse,...) 
Geiger-Mueller-Zaehlrohr 
Geiger-Mueller Counter Geiger-Mueller-Zaehler 
Figure 3. Relational links across multi-lingual structures 
146 
derived lexical network can be used to look at free text and find a collocational fit between a 
datum point in the text and the other words around it, or the generic levels of the other 
words around it, or the collocations of the generic levels of the other words around it, or 
the collocation of the datum point's generic levels. 
This ability to access taxonomic trees, collocates of tree members, and tree members of 
collocates, with no particular NLP in the ordinary senses of the term, should theoretically 
allow the disambiguation f a significant number, perhaps amajority, of the words the free 
text, and, from there, include the words which have been impossible to disambiguate into 
the set of known collocates. 
Every term, then, may be seen as the intersection of values in three dimensions: the 
hierarchical (its ISA link to its immediate superordinate), the collocational (the list of 
words with which it occurred in definition texts), and the transfer (the corresponding 
entry term in the target language, itself an intersection of three dimensions). Using this 
structure, a collocation set can associate a term in a free text with a sense based upon 
text collocational matchings. An ISA path may then be exploited to conceptually generalize 
a term matching a lower node, be translated into the target language anywhere along that 
path, and proceed upward in generality in the target language. 
Using this structure, a collocation set can associate a term in a free text with a sense based 
upon text collocational matchings. An ISA path may then be exploited to conceptually 
generalize a term matching a lower node, be translated into the target language along that 
path up to the most general ISA link in the TEAM portion, and proceed upward in 
generality in the target language. A general term in free text may use collocation links to 
direct a downward ISA path, translate along the path from the most general TEAM entry 
downward, and have available the ISA tree for generalization in the other language. The 
project design described here employs recent work in elicitation of machine- readable 
dictionary structures to perform multi-lingual processing. The lexical- semantic semantic 
structures, when optimized, form a base in which each term has a value on (at least) three 
dimensions. A matching term in a text, then, can be disambiguated by matching 
collocation, can be generalized by its taxonomic path, and can be manipulated in either of 
these ways in any of the languages for which it has a transfer. 
This work is representative of the viewpoint of applied NLP, that is, that the consistency 
and the recoverability of methodological assumptions and actions is more important than 
the "psychological reality" that was suggested by the similarity of dictionary and folk 
taxonomies. The ISA relation is, or is very similar to, well attested lexical-semantic 
principles among speakers in many languages. The "simply collocationar' relation is a 
convenience toavoid making wrong relational hypotheses. 
The intent of this model was information extraction from messages in one language and 
representation in a template in another (without ranslating it). This effort ignored any idea 
that the higher levels of MRD-generated structures represented metalinguistic expressions 
of concepts rather than words themselves. In this case, I at best begged the question, since 
the language of the words at all levels of all the hierarchies was directly relevant to the 
functioning of the systems. So no claim was made about he organization of knowledge on 
dictionary taxonomies other than the words labeling the nodes had succeedingly more 
general references. 
147 
Again, this work is indicative of a direction in which applications can beg several questions 
about he purely lexical versus the purely conceptual representations. Traversing 
hierarchies generated by lexical processes as if they were cognitive categories evades the 
whole issue of the boundary that must lie between them. Further, the way that multi- 
lingual information isextracted above is completely artificial. Yet the evaluation metric will 
be how well the application does its job (precision, recall, efficiency), not the identification 
of the lexical - non-lexical boundary. 
2. Natural Language Processing Systems. Application processes may be 
artificial, but the dictionary representation itself has valuable attributes derived from its 
status as a human linguistic artifact. As long as the organizing relations are derivable from 
the corpus itself (and not imposed from analyst interpretation), then there is an internal 
consistency which forms the basis of efficient knowledge representation built by 
recoverable principles. The most promising new NLP systems may be those which use 
some extemaUy-denved l xical system to represent the lexical semantics of the system, and 
its conceptual structure as well. Notable among these is the work at New Mexico State in 
just the sort of dictionary work described above to the service of machine translation (Wilks 
and Slator 1987). 
From the very practical perspective of doing applied NLP it has become repeatedly 
apparent hat lexical structures turn out to be an excellent basis for knowledge 
representation, as long as the exact distinction between the two types of knowledge is not 
important for the intended application. 
In the Siemens METAL machine translation system, an intentionally minimalist set of 
lexical semantic features coded for words could be varied for specialized sub-lexicons 
germane to the particular subject area of the translation task (Bennett 1988). In the Martin 
Marietta EQUAL database interface, general lexical semantic properties were segregated 
from knowledge about the database schema, but the two components were of the same 
data structure (frames), and linked themselves hierarchically during query generation 
(White 1988). In the PRC PAKTUS system (for which I can only claim affiliation 
without echnical involvement), he description of word behavior is located in three areas in 
a PAKTUS system: the language-dependent l xical category networks, the language- 
independent, domain-independent conceptual frame structure, and an application-specific 
domain network. The underlying concept structure is not dependent upon any subject 
domain, yet, again, the parts are of the same data structure type and successful message 
understanding depends on the connection of those structures (Loatman and Post 1988). In 
each of these cases, especially in the latter two, the association of lexical-semantic 
information with complement-role information, and on through domain specific facts, 
results in a very general abstract representation rather like that of a well-articulated MT 
interlingua. While a combination of information from different components, the 
representational structure itself does not maintain the segregation of lexical and other 
knowledge distinctly, having thus uniform access to the facts required to do its job (query a 
database, populate one, or disseminate a message). 
Now a great many systems to their credit do establish a component that expresses this 
singularity and domain information. And it can be done in a way that is dissimilar, at least 
conceptually, tothe way lexical entries are coded for semantic properties. For example, I 
cite the script designs of long vintage, still exploited in numerous ystems uch as the 
CMU KBMT system (Carbonell 1988). However, this modularity does not distinctly 
segregate the two types of knowledge. There is nothing unconscionable about expressing 
knowledge of the world as values of features asserted in the lexicon, even when there is a 
way of expressing the same information i  the script, if it happens to work better that way 
148 
for the purpose of the NLP task at hand, and is more easily maintained from a software 
engineering position. 
Having absolved the lapse in determining the true world vs. lexical nature of particular 
relevant bits of information, approaches which exploit the lapse generally don't grasp 
those problems like overlap of the worlds (domains here) in which synonymy occurs. Nor 
do they handle the subtleties of vagueness/homophony issues (*John plays the flute and 
Harry football) which turn up more than we expect in the operational use of machine 
translation. Similarly, the peculiar problems of database interface, where ambiguity 
between field name and field value is more worldly than lexical, yet not intuitively either, 
invite practical lexical solutions which are forgiven when effective and maintainable. 
3. Conclusion. As we have seen, lexical and world knowledge must be distinguished, 
lest we lapse into an unenlightened determinism of human institutions. At the same time, 
though, interesting realizations emerge through the inability to discretely segregate he two. 
From the point of view of the way humans really do organize their universes, evidence 
from worldview can lend evidence to lexical organization, even if we do not know where 
the boundary is. From applied natural language processing, it is perhaps the case that NLP 
will perform better once the boundaries are known. But for now, lexical structures, when 
built from consistent, non-capricious principles, can serve as the bases both of lexical and 
conceptual components, erving the needs of the application as well as the needs of 
software ngineering. 
149 
References 
Amsler, R. 1980. The Structure of the Merriam-Webster Pocket Dictionary. Ph.D. Thesis, 
Austin, TX: University of Texas. 
Amsler, R. and J. White, 1979. Development of a Computational Methodology for 
Deriving Natural Language Semantic Structures via Analysis of Machine-Readable 
Dictionaries. Technical Report TR MCS77-01315, Linguistics Research Center, 
University of Texas. 
Bennett, W. 1988. "Methodological Considerations in the METAL Project." Proceedings 
of the Second International Conference on Theoretical nd Methodological Issues in 
Machine Translation of Natural Languages. Carnegie-Mellon University Center for 
Machine Translation. 
Berlin, B., D. Breedlove and P. Raven. I974. Principles of Tzeltal Plant Classifi'cation. 
New York: Academic Press. 
Carbonell, J. and M. Tomita. 1985. "New Approaches to Machine Translation." 
Proceedings of the First Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues 
inbMachine Translation of Natural Languages. Colgate University. 
Kay, P. and W. Kempton. 1984. "What is the Sapir-Whorf Hypotthesis?" American 
Anthropologist 86.1. 
Loatman, B. and S. Post. 1988. "Natural Language Processing for Intelligence Message 
Analysis" Signal Magazine. September, 1988. 
G.&C. Merriam. 1971. The New Merriam-Webster Pocket Dictionary. New York: 
Pocket Books. 
White, J. 1978. "It's Impolite to Stare and Worse to Point: Linguistics and the Tojolabal 
Occult"Proceedings of the 1977 Mid-America Linguistics Conference. University of 
Missouri- Columbia. 
White, J. 1988. "Advantages of Modularity in Natural Language Interface." Proceedings 
of the Third Annual Rocky Mountain Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Denver: 
June, 1988. 
White, J. 1989. "Determination f Lexical-Semantic Relations for Multi-lingual 
Terminology Structures." In Relational Models of the Lexicon, ed. M. Evens. 
Cambridge University Press. 
150 
Wilks, Y. and B. Slator. 1987. "Towards Semantic Structure from Dictionary Entries." 
In Proceedings of the Second Annual Rocky Mountain Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence. Boulder, Colorado. 
151 
