Representation of Semantic Knowledge with Term 
Subsumption Languages 
Gerrit Burkert, Peter Forster 
Institut fffr Informatik, Universit~t Stuttgart 
Breitwiesenstr. 20/22 
D-7000 Stuttgart 80, Germany 
e-mail: 
burkert@informatik, uni-stuttgart, de 
forster@informatik, uni-stuttgart, de 
Abstract 
One problem in the design of a lexicon for natural language processing is the repre- 
sentation of semantic knowledge. We examine the adequacy of knowledge representa- 
tion formalisms developed in artificial intelligence, in particular of term subsumption 
languages for these issues. In order to derive some basic requirements for a suitable 
representation language we analyze a number of definitions of a monolingual dictio- 
nary. 
1 Introduction 
The lexicon as one of the major linguisitic knowledge sources of a natural language process- 
ing (NLP) system contains among others morphological, syntactic and semantic knowl- 
edge. The design of an appropriate l xicon involves the following questions: 
? Which size is required for the lexicon for a given application? 
* What are the units of the vocabulary? 
? How should lexical information be represented? 
? What kinds of techniques should be applied for generating a large lexicon, e.g., could 
the lexicon be partially generated by extracting information from machine-readable 
dictionaries? 
In this paper we address the third problem, more precisely the representation of se- 
mantic information. 
Semantic knowledge iscrucial for both understanding and generating natural language. 
One important class of representation models for semantic knowledge are the network 
models, which have been influenced by early association models. In network models, word 
meanings can be described by relationships to other word meanings. In contrast, other 
models for representing semantic knowledge aim at the representation f structural aspects 
of word meanings o that a particular word meaning is built up by a set of particular 
semantic features. 
During the last years, a number of knowledge representation (KR) systems have been 
built using term subsumption languages (TSLs). TSLs are formal anguages for defining 
concepts by reference to superconeepts and by specification ofadditional features. Because 
of the similarity of concept descriptions inTSLs and dictionary definitions based on "genus 
67 
proximum et differentia specifica', it seems useful to investigate to what extent TSLs can 
be used for the representation f word meanings. 
In the next section, we discuss ome properties of TSLs and their relation to other KR 
formalisms. In order to get some hints whether TSLs are suitable for the representation 
of word meanings we examine several dictionary definitions. Next, we give a short intro- 
duction to our terminological formalism and outline, how the formalism can be integrated 
into a lexicon. Finally, we summarize the results and give a short survey of our current 
work. 
2 Knowledge representation and TSLs 
In the field of AI, many researchers have addressed the problem of knowledge representa- 
tion; in this area semantic networks played an important role. In semantic networks the 
knowledge is described by nodes and links. While Quillian aimed at the representation 
of word meanings \[Quillian 68\], semantic networks have also been used to model proposi- 
tions, events, spatial relationships and so on. Since semantic networks failed in providing 
a unique semantic interpretation, several researchers examined the "semantics of semantic 
networks" (\[Woods 75\], \[Brachman 79\]). 
Another approach is to organize knowledge in chunks called frames \[Minsky 75\] which 
are used to represent "stereotypical situations". Frames typically allow the specification 
of default slot values, perspectives and attached procedures. Collections of frames can be 
combined to frame-systems. The expressive power of frame systems makes it impossible 
to provide a well defined semantics for them. 
Both, elements of different network formalisms and basics of the frame theory, have 
influenced the structural inheritance networks and the subsequent implementations (KL- 
ONE, \[BrachmanSchmolze 85\]). The basic idea is to postulate a level of knowledge repre- 
sentation with "knowledge structuring primitives, rather than particular knowledge prim- 
itives" (\[Brachman 79\]), the so-called epistemological level. The basic buildung blocks 
of KL-ONE representations are "concepts", i.e. structured conceptual objects. "Roles" 
are possible relationships between two concepts. The subsumption relation organizes the 
concepts in a concept axonomy. Concepts are described with respect o their supercon- 
cepts by restricting and differentiating roles. In particular, roles can be restricted by the 
number (number estriction) and the range (value restriction) of allowed role fillers. If the 
specified restrictions constitute necessary and sufficient conditions for the concept, it is 
called a defined concept, wheras primitive concepts only need necessary conditions. Clas- 
sification, an important inference mechanism of KL-ONE like systems, inserts concepts at 
the correct place in the concept hierarchy. 
A logical reconstruction of KL-ONE revealed that the semantic status of a number 
of notions of KL-ONE was rather unclear. TSLs are formal knowledge representation 
languages derived from KL-ONE providing well-defined semantics which enables the de- 
cision whether the inferences are sound and complete. A number of KR systems based 
on TSLs have been developed, for instance, Krypton \[Brachman et al 85\], KL-Two \[Vi- 
lain 85\], Back \[Peltason et al 89\], Loom \[MacGregorBates 87\]. Besides a component for 
defining concepts and reasoning about the relationships between concepts (terminological 
component, TBox) these systems include an assertional component (ABox) that allows 
the definition of assertions about individuals. 
68 
3 Representing word meanings with TSLs 
While aspects of syntactic structure are rather well understood in NLP, the problem of 
representing semantic information is far from being solved. Scientists from various re- 
search areas, e.g., linguistics, philosophy of language, lexicology and artificial intelligence, 
are dealing with problems concering the nature of word meanings and means for their 
representation. 
In the following, we make some general remarks on semantic description without going 
into details of any semantic theory. A particular aspect all semantic theories are concerned 
with is the principle of compositionality: the meaning of a sentence is a function of the 
meaning of each of its components and its context. As a first approximation, one could ab- 
stract away from the context or assume a typical context (paradigmatic analysis). A good 
semantic theory, however, must allow the notion of semantic variation. So, in addition to 
the enumeration of possibly different senses of a word, we have to examine the meaning 
of a word in varying contexts (syntagmatic analysis). Also, a finite enumeration of word 
senses does not suffice to explain the creative use of words (\[BoguraevPustejovsky 90\]). 
In addition to syntactic and semantic knowledge, the process of understanding natural 
language involves extralinguistic (encyclopedic) knowledge. Mechanisms for the combi- 
nation of these types of knowledge are an important prerequisite for natural language 
understanding. 
The analysis of word meanings is also the subject of dictionary definitions. During the 
last years, there has been an increasing interest in methods for extracting lexical semantic 
information from machine-readable dictionaries (see for example \[BoguraevBriscoe 89\]). 
There is, however, no consensus about the representation formalism into which the mean- 
ing descriptions hould be transformed. In our opinion, the suitability of AI-based KR 
formalisms for the representation of semantic knowledge and as a means for the combi- 
nation of linguistic and extralinguistic knowledge has to be investigated. As a first step, 
we are analyzing a number of simple dictionary definitions in order to derive some basic 
requirements which a representation language has to meet to be usable for the represen- 
tation of word meanings. The results will allow us to assess the suitability of TSLs for 
that matter. 
In a dictionary, different meanings of a word are usually specified by means of def- 
initions, examples, references and pictures. 1 Subsequently, we will concentrate on the 
analysis of meaning definitions. There exist different ypes of definitions, e.g., 2 
? definition by reference to synonyms 
- acclaim: applause; approval. 
- complaint: illness; disease. 
- jowl: jaw. 
? definition by reference to antonyms 
- absolute: not relative. 
1A comparison between different ypes of dictionaries and a closer investigation of the definitions in a 
dictionary can not be given here. See for example \[Hausmann 85\]. 
2Even though we investigated german definitions from the Duden Bedentung~wJrterbuch (\[Duden 85\]) 
the def in i t ions  we mention in this section are taken from the machine-readable version of the Oxford 
Advanced Learner's Dictionary (\[OALD 88\]) because it turned out to be difficult to translate the german 
definitions without loss of information. 
59 
- affected: not natural or genuine. 
- wild: (of plants) not cultivated. 
? definiton by reference to hyperonyms and modifying elements 
- park: public garden or public recreation ground in a town. 
- bobsled: large, long sleigh with brake and steering wheel, used for racing. 
- blackboard: board used in schools for writing and drawing on with chalk. 
We will have a closer look at nominal definitions of the latter type which contain a 
genus term of the defined word. 3 
The first part of the definition of park, namely "public garden", can be represented 
by a concept with superconcept garden and a relation called PROPERTY to the concept 
public: 
a park is a 
garden 
with PROPERTY public 
A visualization of this definition (in a KL-ONE-Iike graphical notation) is given in 
Fig. 1. 
~arden ) 
PROPERTY 
Figure 1: Representation of park  
The concept identifiers, e.g., garden, in the example have to be distinguished from the 
corresponding word forms. 4 Each concept represents one of the possible meanings of the 
corresponding word. 
This example shows at least two problems of representing word meanings with TSLs. 
The main problem arises from the fact, that the epistemological primitives of a TSL do 
not give enough specifications for the representation of word meanings. Many nominal 
definitions contain nouns modified with adjectives. We need a number of predefined 
3In the German monolingual defining dictionary \[Duden 85\] around 70~ out of a sample of 126 ran- 
domly chosen definitions of nouns are of that type. 
4 In order to distinguish between concepts and words concepts are in the following printed in t ypewr it e r 
style. 
70 
and modifiable roles, like the relation PROPERTY between the nominal concepts and the 
concepts representing these adjectives. 
Another important relation for the representation of noun meanings is the part-whole 
relation, called meronyrny. An example is the definition of bobsled:' large, long sleigh with 
brake and steering wheel, used for racing. The concept bobsled refers to the parts brake 
and s teer ing-ghee l :  
a bobsled is a 
sleigh 
with PROPERTY large 
with PROPERTY long 
with PART brake 
with PART steering-wheel 
with FUNCTION racing 
This example shows a third class of important relations for the definition of noun 
meanings, i.e. the normal uses or functions of a thing. The relations can be further 
specialized, e.g., the PART relation describes different types of meronymy like COMPONENT, 
MEMBER, MATERIAL (see \[Miller et al 90\]). 
The part-whole relation is a relation between nominal concepts and can be represented 
in a TSL-based KR formalism by means of roles. Number and type of given parts can 
be described by number restriction and value restriction respectively. Different parts of a 
thing have to be specified by different subroles of a more general PART role. In the example 
above the two components brake and steering-wheel have to be related to bobsled by 
two COMPONENT roles: 
a bobsled is a 
sleigh 
with COMPONENTI brake 
with COMPONENT2 steering-wheel 
The roles are organized in a role hierarchy: 
COMPONENT is a PART 
COMPONENTlis a COMPONENT 
COMPONENT2 is a COMPONENT 
The PROPERTY relation is a relation between nominal concepts and "property concepts", 
e.g., public in the first example. Such kinds of concepts do not fit into a term hierarchy 
because they usually do not have suitable superconcepts or individuals. Consequently, 
the most important inference mechanism of TSLs, namely classification is unsuitable for 
the representation of property concepts. We presumably need another formalism for the 
representation of properties, in which other relations, for example antonymy, play an 
important role (\[GrossMiller 90\]). This formalism has to be combined with the term 
subsumption formalism. 
The FUNCTION relation relates nominal concepts to concepts representing verb mean- 
ings, e.g., 
71 
a bobs led  is a 
sleigh 
with ...  
with FUNCTION racing 
The representation f verb meanings involves a number of further problems, e.g., the 
representation f space and time, that can not be investigated in this paper. 
Returning to the representation f nominal concepts, we try to represent the complete 
definition of park: public garden or public recreation ground in a town: 
a park is a 
garden 
with PROPERTY publ ic 
oris a 
recreation-gro~md 
with PROPERTY publ ic 
with LOCATION town 
This example demonstrates the necessity of concept disjunction. Disjunction is fre- 
quently used in definitions. Therefore, a KR formalism adequate for the representation 
of semantic knowledge has to provide a form of concept disjunction. Disjunction is not 
allowed in TSLs because it is contrary to the claim that concepts hould only be defined 
with respect o their superconcepts. In the example, both "garden with property pub- 
lic" and "recreation-ground with property public and with location town" (subsequently 
termed p-garden and p-recreat ion-ground respectively) are subconcepts of park, as 
illustrated in Fig. 2. 
publ ic 
\-gro dJ 
PROPERTY PROPERTY f II / /% 
\ -  /  -groundJ_O.....f. '?'?) 
Figure 2: Another representation f park 
This representation f park is unsuitable because it does not guarantee that all parks 
are public gardens or public recreation grounds in a town. A solution to this problem is 
the notion of a "covering", which was inroduced in NIKL (\[Moser 83\]). If park is defined 
as a covering of p-garden and p-recreation-ground, every instance of park will be an 
72 
instance of at least p-garden or p-recreation-ground. In NIKL coverings are used to 
enhance concept specifications but they are ignored by the classifier. 
The investigation of further nominal definitions revealed that several other extensions 
to TSLs are necessary: 
? boil: hard (usn red, often painful) poisoned swelling under the skin, which bursts 
when ripe. 
? boulevard: wide city street, often with trees on each side. 
These examples indicate the existence of typical features of a concept, called "defaults". 
Inferences with defaults require the use of nonmonotonic reasoning techniques which are 
outside the scope of a TSL classifier. 
The following examples how that similarity between concepts is another important 
relation. 
? lemur: nocturnal animal of Madagascar, similar to a monkey but with a foxlike face. 
? marimba: musical instrument similar to the xylophone. 
? quail: small bird, similar to a partridge, valued as food. 
Most of the requirements mentioned above can not be integrated into a TSL main- 
taining sound and complete inferences. Because these requirements seem to be necessary 
for the representation f word meanings, TSLs can provide only a "representational ker- 
nel", which has to be embedded into a component with greater expressive power. This 
component has to allow enhanced concept descriptions, e.g., concept disjunction, defaults 
and similarity of concepts. 
4 An Approach to the Integration 
As a first step we have implemented a KR system that consists of a terminological nd 
an assertional component. The formalism used is similar to the formalism described in 
\[Nebel 90\]. The restricted expressiveness enables inferences that are sound and complete 
and makes the formalism suitable as a platform for the extensions described above. 
A small fragment of the TBox language is illustrated in the following example. The 
concept bobsled is described as a subconcept of sleigh with two PART relations, namely 
COMPONENT1 and COMPONENT2. These roles have to defined separately as specializations 
of COMPONENT. The concept bobsled is primitive because the specifications are necessary 
but not sufficient for the definition of bobsled. 
(defrole (PART)) 
(defrole COMPONENT (PART)) 
(defrole COMPONENT1 (COMPONENT)) 
(defrole COMPONENT2 (COMPONENT)) 
(defconcept bobsled (sleigh) :primitive 
(:all COMPONENTI brake) 
(:all COMPONENT2 steering-wheel)) 
73 
The system is implemented in CLOS (Common Lisp Object System) and an overview 
of its syntax and semantics i  given in \[Forster et al 91\]. 
The formalism has to be integrated into a lexicon, a possible architecture of which 
is shown in Fig. 3. The lexicon consists basically of two components: one containing 
word forms and another for the representation f word meanings. The latter has to be 
embedded into a component for the representation f more general world knowledge. 
word 
world meanings 
knowledge ~ 
word 
forms 
lexicon 
Figure 3: Integration of the components 
5 Conc lus ion  
We have outlined that TSLs are KR formalisms with some interesting features. The 
well-defined semantics allows to decide whether the inference algorithms are sound and 
complete. 
In order to use TSLs for the representation f word meanings we examined a number of 
dictionary definitions. TSLs seem to be adequate for the representation f some aspects 
of noun meanings, for example the subsumption and part-whole relations. There are, 
however, important aspects of word meanings which can not be expressed in TSLs, e.g., 
concept disjunction, defaults and similarity between concepts. As a consequence the TSL 
formalism has to be embedded into a representation system with more expressive power. 
Re ferences  
\[BoguraevBriscoe 89\] B. Boguraev and T. Briscoe (Eds.). Computational Lezicography 
for Natural Language Processing. Longman Group UK Limited, 1989. 
\[BoguraevPustejovsky 90\] B. Boguraev and J. Pustejovsky. Lexical Ambiguity and 
Knowledge Representation. In N. V. Findler (Ed.), 13th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics, llelsinki, 1990. 
\[Brachman etal. 85\] R. Brachman, V. Gilbert and H. Levesque. An Essential Hybrid 
Reasoning System Knowledge and Symbol Level Accounts of KRYPTON. In Proc. 
of IJCAI-85, pp. 532-539, Los Angeles, CA, August 1985. IJCAI, Inc. 
\[Brachman 79\] R. Brachman. On the Epistemological Status of Semantic Networks. In 
N. V. Findler (Ed.), Associative Networks - The Representation and Use of Knowl- 
74 
edge by Computers. Academic Press, New York, 1979. Also BBN Report 38077, April 
1978. 
\[BrachmanSchmolze 85\] R. J. Brachman and J. Schmolze. An Overview of the KL-ONE 
Knowledge Representation System. Cognitive Science, 2(9):45, 1985. 
\[Duden 85\] Duden. Duden Bedeutungswfrterbueh. Bibliographisches Institut, 1985. 
\[Forster et al 91\] P. Forster, G. Burkert and O. Eck. Wissensrepr~entation mit TED und 
ALAN. Forthcoming: Interner Arbeitsbericht, Institut fiir Informatik, Universit~it 
Stuttgart, 1991. 
\[GrossMiller 90\] D. Gross and K. J. Miller. Adjectives in WordNet. International Journal 
of Lexicography, 3:265-277, 1990. 
\[Hausmann 85\] F. J. Hausmann. Lexikologie, pp. 367-411. Athenaum Verlag, 1985. 
\[MacGregorBates 87\] R. MacGregor and R. Bates. The Loom Knowledge Representation 
Language. Technical Report, USC/Information Sciences Institute, 1987. 
\[Miller et al 90\] G. A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross and K. J. Miller. 
Introduction to WordNet: An On-line Lexical Database. International Journal of 
Lexicography, 3:235-244, 1990. 
\[Minsky 75\] M. Minsky. A Framework for Representing Knowledge. In P. H. Winston 
(Ed.), The Psychology of Computer Vision, pp. 211-277. McGraw-Hill, New York, 
1975. 
\[Moser 83\] M. Moser. An Overview of NIKL, the New Implementation f KL-ONE. In 
Research in Natural Language Understanding. Bolt, Beranek, and Newman, Inc., 
Cambridge, MA, 1983. BBN Technical Report 5421. 
\[Nebel 90\] B. Nebel. Reasoning and Revision in Hybrid Representation Systems. Lecture 
Notes in Artificial Intelligence. Springer Verlag, 1990. 
\[OALD 88\] OALD. Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary Electronic Version. Oxford 
University Press, Cambridge, 3rd edition, 1988. 
\[Peltason et al 89\] C. Peltason, A. Schmiedel, C. Kindermann and J. Quantz. The BACK 
System Revisited. Technical Report kit - report 75, Projektgruppe KIT- Fachbereich 
Informatik-TU Berlin, 1989. 
\[Quillian 68\] M. Quillian. Semantic Memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic Information 
Processing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1968. Also PhD Thesis, Carnegie 
Institute of Technology, 1967. 
\[Vilain 85\] M. Vilain. The restricted language architecture of a hybrid representation 
system. In Proceedings of IJCAI-85, Los Angeles, Ca., pp. 547-551. IJCAI, 1985. 
\[Woods 75\] W. Woods. What's in a link: Foundations for semantic networks. In D. G. Bo- 
brow and A. Collins (Eds.), Representation and Understanding: Studies in Cognitive 
Science, pp. 35-82. Academic Press, New York, 1975. 
75 
