Acquiring and representing semantic information 
in a Lexical Knowledge Base 
Nicoletta Calzolari 
Dipartimento di Linguistica - Universit~ di Pisa 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale dei C N R - Pisa 
Via della Faggiola 3~ 
1 56100 Pisa - ITALY  
e-mail: GLOTTOLO @ ICNUCEVM 
Abstract 
The paper focuses on the description of the approach, taken within the ESPRIT 
BRA project ACQUILEX, towards: i) acquisition of semantic information from sev- 
eral machine- readable dictionaries (in four languages), and ii) its representation in 
a common Lexical Knowledge Base. Knowledge xtraction is guided by a) empirical 
observations and b) theoretical hypotheses. As for representation, we stress the con- 
vergence of a) and b) towards the possibility of organizing the information extracted 
from MRDs in the form of 'meaning types' or 'templates', where a common meta- 
language is used to encode conceptual and relational information. Examples taken 
from two Italian monoUngual dictionaries and from LDOCE are given. Different 
uses of these templates (e.g. as guides in the semantic analysis of the definitions, as 
a structure for comparing, unifying, merging, integrating information coming from 
different sources and different languages, as a tool for correcting 'incoherences' in 
dictionaries, etc.) are described. 
Keywords: Computational Lexicography, Lexical Knowledge Base, Lexical Se- 
mantics. 
1 Large computational lexicons and the notion of 
"reusability" 
In order to cope with the task of building large computational lexicons where, to be able 
to process real texts, hundreds of thousands of words are necessary and, moreover, where 
also semantic information is made explicit for very large portions of the lexicon, the notion 
of "reusability" has become a central notion in the field of computational lexicography. 
This concept came out at the Grosseto Workshop (1986) on "Automating the Lexicon", 
sponsored by the EC (see Walker, Zampolli, Calzolari, forthcoming), where, among the 
set of recommendations, there was that of designing "large reusable, multifunctional, 
precompetitive, multilingual linguistic resources". 
Reusable must be interpreted in two main senses: 
reusab le_ l :  to exploit and reuse lexical information implicitly or explicitly present in 
preexisting lexical resources (MRDs, terminological DBs, textual corpora, etc.) as 
an aid to construct large computational lexicons of the type reusable_2; 
reusable_2:  to construct Computational Lexicons in such a way that various users (differ- 
ent NLP systems - in different heoretical frameworks and for different applications- 
, but also human users such as lexicographers, linguists, common users) can extract 
- with appropriate interfaces - relevant lexical information. 
188 
Current work on Computational Lexicons can be divided into two major types, each 
corresponding to the two meanings above: reusable_l and reusable_2. 
ACQUILEX, an ESPRIT BRA project, can be seen as the prototype of the first of 
these main streams of research, linked with the notion 'reusable-l', while other projects 
as e.g. Eurotra-7 insert themselves in the second sense of the 'reusability' concept. 
2 MRDs as impl ic i t  Knowledge  Bases  
ACQUILEX (see Boguraev et al 1988) focuses its research effort in developing techniques 
and methodologies for utilising and interpreting existing machine-readable dictionaries 
(MRD) to construct components for NLP systems. The main focus of the project is in 
the extraction of lexical - -  syntactic and semantic - -  information from multiple machine- 
readable dictionaries in a multilingual context with the overall goal of constructing a single 
multilingual lexical knowledge base (LKB). The dictionaries we are actually using in the 
project are: two monolingual English, two Italian, one Dutch, one Spanish, one bilingual 
Italian - English, one Dutch - English. 
The information extracted is not only the information which is already explicit in 
MRDs (word-lists, part-of-speech, etc.), but mainly the information which in MRDs 
is only implicitly present and not directly and immediately accessible (mostly semantic 
information, such as semantic taxonomies, other semantic relations, argument structures, 
etc.). In the final LKB prototype it will be possible to "navigate" within the lexicon with 
access also through concepts and semantic relations. 
In this approach it is considered possible a procedural exploitation of the full range 
of semantic information implicitly contained in MRDs. The dictionary is therefore con- 
sidered in this framework as a primary source of "basic general knowledge", and main 
objectives are word-sense acquisition and knowledge organization. The main sources of 
this information are natural language definitions. The reasons of their use can be found 
in the following aspects: 
i) the lexicographic tradition has exerted a (usually unconscious) control over the defin- 
ing vocabulary (statement made really explicit only in LDOCE) and the schemata 
of defining formulas; 
ii) the texts of definitions do not describe singular objects or events but "typical" ones; 
iii) lexicographers have translated the concepts in their mind into definitions, and we 
can try to move back along this path from definitions to concept acquisition; 
iv) the definitions incorporate a naif view of the semantic and world-knowledge infor- 
mation attached to lexical entries. 
The goal of ACQUILEX is the formalization of this basic general knowledge (which 
can also be considered as a prerequisite to domain-specific knowledge) in the form of 
concepts and semantic relations. The method is heuristic and mainly inductive, through 
progressive generalization from the common elements. 
The main themes of research connected to this goal of knowledge acquisition are the 
following: 
189 
the design of procedures for the extract ion of  superord inates  from natural an- 
guage definitions, for their disambiguation, and for the construction of taxonomies 
all over the lexicon; 
the design of procedures for the (linguistic and computational) analysis of natu- 
ral language definitions with the aim of extract ing all the implicit  semantic 
information; 
the study of ways of formal ly represent ing the semant ic  informat ion which 
is extracted - -  concepts, attributes, and relations between concepts - -  e.g. in the 
form of 'typed feature structures'; 
? the study of how to link and unify taxonomies and conceptual or relational infor- 
mation coming from different sources, either monolingual or multilingual; 
? the design and implementation f basic software for the creation, access and pro- 
cessing of lexical databases and a lexical knowledge base. 
These research themes tackled within ACQUILEX are aimed at meeting one of the 
major bottlenecks of natural language processing, i.e. the availability of "large" compu- 
tational exicons with particular emphasis on making also semantic information explicit 
and accessible. 
3 Semant ic  In format ion  
3.1 Towards  s tandard izat ion  a t  the  taxonomic  leve l  
The procedural methodology for acquiring taxonomic information can be considered rather 
well established (see e.g. Byrd et al 1987, Calzolari 1988). In this respect, the dictionary 
is considered as a "classificatory device", i.e. an empirical means of instantiating concepts. 
The MRD gives in fact one possible way of learning a concept (where the "learning" process 
assumes an inductive form): linking a concept o all its instances. All the instances of the 
same category/class are in fact extracted and connected together. 
What is of interest with respect o taxonomies are not the leaf nodes, representing 
rather specific words, but middle- and top-level nodes in the IS-A hierarchy. These 
represent the core concepts by means of which the other words are defined via taxonomic 
relationship. An attempt o normal izat ion is therefore being made in the project at 
the level of these core-nodes, in order both a) to give a more consistent structure to the 
hierarchy deriving from definitions, and b) to make possible the linking and merging of 
taxonomies extracted from different dictionaries and from different languages. 
Analyses have already been performed which lead to the grouping of subsets of nodes 
under a same "conceptual label" representing the generalization over specific lexicalization 
of a similar lexical meaning. These conceptual labels are obtained through a comparative 
analysis of the different axonomies for the different dictionaries, in order to create links 
and mappings between them, and constitute a first simple attempt of standardization at
the semantic level. They should be analysed and compared with semantic primitives or 
features tated in other semantic systems. 
190 
3.2 More complex semantic and wor ld-knowledge information: 
"types" and representat ion in terms of common feature struc- 
tures 
The aim of ACQUILEX in its second year is to extract, in addition to the simple IS-A 
links, more complex - -  and so far not really thoroughly analysed - -  semantic informa- 
tion hidden in the 'differentia' of the lexicographic definitions. In a project with several 
partners there is the necessity of working with similar (global) strategies of knowledge 
acquisition in order to reach the same result, i.e. a common LKB. We do not rely on a 
random extraction, but apply a knowledge acquisition strategy which, according to our 
views, must be guided by: 
a) empirical observations, 
b) theoretical hypotheses. 
What is meant by a) is rather simple, being the so often observed systematic regular- 
ities and similarities of lexical items and definitional patterns. 
By b) we intend the use of the theoretical pproach to lexical semantics put forward by 
Pustejovsky (see Pustejovsky 1989, Pustejovsky and Boguraev forthcoming) in his 'qualia 
structures'. This approach makes use of a knowledge representation framework to express 
different aspects of knowledge structures concerning words. The qualia structure for a 
noun defines its essential attributes and "is in essence an argument structure for nouns". 
In ACQUILEX we use a similar approach and similar types of structures, but in a 
broader sense than the qualia structures used by Pustejovsky which are made up of four 
main Roles (Constitutive, Formal, Telic, Agentive). These four main roles on the one 
side do not cover the whole range of lexical notions which characterize nominals, and on 
the other side do not include other pertinent world-knowledge information which can be 
useful in many NLP tasks or applications and can be found in MRDs. 
We therefore take the underlying hypothesis of having "meaning types" and use the 
notion of "template" as main structuring device for semantic information, but enlarge this 
notion of template to include and represent: i) other semantic information ot covered 
by the four main roles, and moreover ii) also more general or encyclopedic nformation 
concerning the concepts. An example of the template derived from the analysis of the 
definitions of three monolingual dictionaries (two Italian, one English) is given in Figure 1 
for the concept of SUBSTANCE. 
Dictionary definitions are suitable for an explicit representation i  terms of feature 
structures as data types, which reproduce (at least partially) in an explicit way the original 
linear textual data (obviously not all of the definitions of a dictionary, and often not the 
entire definition). 
This feature structure can be seen as a "meaning type", representing a maximal frame 
for a class of words (e.g. all the words defined by the word 'substance' orby its hyponyms). 
This frame, with all the potential attributes which in the definitions are found as most 
relevant for this subset, is inherited (as a "potential meaning type") by all the hyponyms 
of a "Top Node" (SUBSTANCE) and will be filled in some of its slots for each individual 
hyponym. 
If we consider the "meaning structure" of LIQUID (see Figure 2) it is constituted by 
a subset of the attributes of SUBSTANCE, the same holds for GAS, and so on. 
191 
There will obviously be different "meaning types" for different categories of words. At- 
tributes for verbs usually represent thematic roles which are relevant for a given "Action 
Type" and, where possible, also aspectual information is now being semi-automatically 
extracted from the definitions (see Alonge 1991). An example of the structures which 
result from dictionary definitions for the verbs of "hitting" and "dividing" is given in 
Figure 3. When an argument slot is filled for a hyponym of "to hit", this is an inherently 
specified argument (e.g. in "to hammer" the instrument role is lexically specified). How- 
ever, as seen above, the view of assigning to nouns descriptions in terms of "frames" is 
also taken, with attributes or slots (and fillers), which are, at least partly, acquired from 
a procedural analysis of the definitions. 
Different ypes of templates with different attributes are typical of "derivatives", which 
constitute a very large portion of a lexicon. They exhibit very special patterns and 
relationships with respect o their bases, with very interesting properties from a linguistic 
point of view. Their conceptual templates contain, among many others, attributes such as: 
AGENT, ACT_OF, PROPERTY_NAME, LOCATION, SET_OF, etc., but also attributes 
of a more encyclopedic nature such as: INHABITANT_OF, FOLLOWER.OF, etc. 
We can associate to each of these relational patterns, which contribute to defining a 
very large amount of lexical items, conceptual templates (sets of properties) which are 
then inherited by default by all their defined words. As an example, we can associate to 
the AGENT attribute, among the others, the following set of attributes: 
IS_A : human 
TELIC : verb 
where 'verb' is a variable which takes as value the base- verb for each derivative. E.g.: 
lavoratore: \[AGENT: lavorare\] by default also inherits: \[IS_A: human, TELIC: lavorare\]. 
It is with data of these types that we are beginning to feed the common LKB, a network 
consisting not only of IS_A relations, but of all the different ypes of semantic relations 
and semantic features implicitly present in the "differentia" part of all the definitions from 
all the available sources. 
3.3 The  Templates  
The templates, or feature structures, in which we represent the semantic information, 
will serve many purposes in the whole process of knowledge acquisition, organization and 
representation. 
They can be used in the following tasks: 
a) As a guide both in the automatic or semi-automatic parsing of all the definitions 
of a same lexicM field, from the top to leaf-nodes in the taxonomy, and in the 
interpretation of the results of the parsing process (e.g. to predict and constrain 
the interpretation of certain types of structures, or the proper attachment of PPs, 
etc.). In this syntactic/semantic parsing process the appropriate attribute/slots in 
the template are filled with the pertinent values. 
b) As a common structure to be filled independently of the actual exical/surfaccrealizations 
of the semantic features, both in different dictionaries for the same language and 
in different languages. They act therefore as a scheme which makes uniform the 
interpretation process throughout all the different sources. 
192 
c) As a tool for comparing information coming from different sources, while making 
possible a semi- automatic and partiM mapping of word--senses. When a link or a 
mapping is established, the data coming from different dictionaries are combined, 
according to the results of the ~omparison, either: 
i) by merging, when different surface lexicMizations are found for the same un- 
derlying concept (and in this case a score can be given to reinforce that infor- 
mation), or 
ii) by integrating different ypes of information on the same lexical item, e.g. 
filling different attributes. 
d) As a tool for correcting errors or incoherencies, e.g. in the use of superordinates 
in the dictionary definitions. 
These tasks can be summarized as follows: 
? disambiguation 
? knowledge acquisition 
? knowledge uniformization 
? knowledge representation 
? knowledge comparison 
- merging 
- integration 
These templates are inherited as potential "meaning types" by all the hyponyms, and 
the taxonomies are the vehicles by means of which this information is inherited. Obviously 
some of the values can be overridden by specific information. 
4 Conc lus ions  
With this common method of representing the information, the goal of sharing data 
and establishing correspondances among different sources is achieved. In this approach 
taxonomies and conceptual templates constitute in fact the point of convergence between 
different sources and languages, and between the empirical and the theoretical pproaches. 
The taxonomies and the templates - - as developed within ACQUILEX - -  already con- 
stitute a first degree of normalization or standardization in the representation f semantic 
and world-knowledge information, both across many (about 10) dictionaries and (4) lan- 
guages, and between the lexicographic approach to semantics and theoretical pproaches. 
This is the first time that a project of semantic and world-knowledge information encoding 
for a very large part of the lexicon is carried out in such an extensive way. 
193 
5 References  
Alonge A. (1991), "Extraction of information on Aktionsart from Verb Definitions", in 
Proceedings of Avignon Conference on NLP, Avignon. 
Byrd R.J., N. Calzolari, M. Chodorow, J. Klavans, M. Neff and O. Rizk (1987), "Tools 
and Methods for Computational Lexicology", Computational Linguistics. 13(3-4), 219- 
240. 
Boguraev B.K., E. Briscoe, N. Calzolari, A. Cater, W. Meijs, A. Zampolli (1988), 
"Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge for Natural Language Processing Systems", proposal 
for ESPRIT BRA, Cambridge (UK). 
Boguraev B. K., R.J. Byrd, J. L. Klavans, M. S. Neff (1989), "From Structural Anal- 
ysis of Lexical Resources to Semantics in a Lexical Knowledge Base", presented at the 
Workshop on Lexicon Acquisition, IJCAI, Detroit. 
Calzolari N. (1988), "The dictionary and the thesaurus can be combined", in M. 
Evens (ed.), Relational Models of the Lexicon, Studies in Natural Language Processing, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 75-96. 
Pustejovsky J. (1989), "Current Issues in Computational Lexical Semantics", Invited 
Lecture, Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, 
Manchester, England. 
Pustejovsky J., B. Boguraev (forthcoming), "A richer Characterization f Dictionary 
Entries: The Role of Knowledge Representation", in S. Atkins, A. Zampolli (eds.), Com- 
putational Approaches to the Lexicon: Automating the Lexicon, OUP. 
Walker D., A. Zampolli, N. Calzolari (eds.) (forthcoming), Automating the Lexicon: 
Research and Practice in a Multilingual Environment, OUP. 
194 
SUBSTANCE 
FUNCTION 
USED_FOR (TELIC): 
USED_IN: 
USED_AS: 
USED_BY: 
PROPERTY 
NATURE: 
STRUCTURE: 
ORIGIN: 
STATE: 
TASTE: 
SMELL: 
COLOUR: 
SHAPE: 
ASPECT: 
LACKING: 
SIMILAR_TO: 
CONSTITUENCY 
CONSTITUTED_BY: 
MAIN: 
MUCH: 
CONSTITUENT_OF: 
MAIN: 
SOURCE 
DERIVED_FROM: 
PRODUCED_BY: 
PRODUCED_BY.MEANS_OF: 
LOCATION: 
CAUSE_OF: 
TYPIC_EXAMPLE:  
NAME: 
Figure 1: Example of the template for SUBSTANCE Nouns. 
195 
FUNCTION 
USED_FOR (TELIC): 
USED_IN: 
USED_AS: 
PROPERTY 
SMELL: 
COLOUR: 
CONSTITUENCY 
CONSTITUTED_BY: 
MAIN: 
MUCH: 
CONSTITUENT_OF: 
MAIN: 
SOURCE 
DERIVED_FROM: 
PRODUCED_BY: 
PRODUCED_BY_MEANS_OF: 
LOCATION: 
CA,USE_OF: 
L IQUID 
Figure 2: Example of the template for LIQUID Nouns. 
C O L P I It E (to hit) 
WITH_INSTR: 
MANNER: 
OBJECT: 
ITERATIVITY: 
LOCATION: 
D IV IDE i tE ( tod iv ide)  
OBJECT: 
IN_PARTS: 
PART_NAME: 
PART_NUMBER: 
WITH_S.ONE: 
WITHANSTR: 
Figure 3: Examples of templates for Verbs derived from dictionary definitions. 
196 
References 
Alonge A. (1991), "Extraction of information on Aktionsart from Verb Definitions", in 
Proceedings of Avignon Conference on NLP, Avignon. 
Byrd R.J., N. Calzolari, M. Chodorow, J. Klavans, M. Neff and O. Rizk (1987), "Tools and 
Methods for Computational Lexicology", Compututional Lhtguistics. 13(3-4), 219-240. 
Boguraev B.K., E. Briscoe, N. Calzolari, A. Cater, W. Meijs, A. Zampolli (1988), 
"Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge for Natural Language Processing Systems", proposal for 
ESPRIT BRA, Cambridge (UK). 
Boguraev B. K., R.J. Byrd, J. L. Klavans, M. S. Neff (1989), "From Structural Analysis of 
Lexical Resources to Semantics in a Lexical Knowledge Base", presented at the Workshop 
on Lexicon Acquisition, IJCAI, Detroit. 
Calzolari N. (1988), "The dictionary and the thesaurus can be combined", in M. Evens (ed.), 
Relational Models of the Lexicon, Studies in N~ltural Language Processing, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 75-96. 
Pustejovsky J. (1989), "Current Issues in Computational Lexical Semantics", Invited Lecture, 
Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of the Eltro/)t'cln Chapter qf the ACL, Manchester, 
England. 
Pustejovsky J., B. Boguraev (forthcoming), "A richer Characterization f Dictionary Entries: 
The Role of Knowledge Representation", in S. Atkins, A. Zampolli (eds.), Computational 
Approaches to the Lexicon: Automathlg the Lexicon, OUP. 
Walker D., A. Zampolli, N. Calzolari (eds.) (forthc~ming), Atm)mathtg he Lexicon: Research 
and Practice in a Multilingual Environment, OUP. 
197 
