Using Cue Phrases to Determine a Set of Rhetorical Relations 
Alistair Knott  
Department  of Artificial Intelligence, University of Edinburgh 
80, South Bridge, Edinburgh EH1 1HN, Scotland 
email: A.Knott@aisb.ed.ac.uk 
'Relation based' approaches to discourse analysis and text generation suffer from a com- 
mon problem: there is considerable disagreement between researchers over the set of relations 
which is proposed. Few researchers use identical sets of relations, and many use relations 
not found in any other sets. This proliferation of relations has been pointed out before (eg 
Hovy \[1\]), and several methods for justifying a standard set of relations have been proposed: 
this paper reviews some of these, and presents a new method of justification which overcomes 
some awkward problems. 
1 Current  Approaches  to Just i fy ing  a Set of  Re la t ions  
Descr ip t ive  Adequacy  
Clearly, a set of relations must have 'good coverage'--it must be possible to analyse all the 
texts of the kind targeted using the specified relations. At the same time, this cannot be 
the only requirement on a set of relations, because many different sets of relations can be 
used to describe the same set of texts. For instance, the level of detail of the description 
is not constrained: how do we decide whether or not to subdivide RESULT into VOLITIONAL 
RESULT and NON-VOLITIONAL RESULT? Again, different cuts through the space of relations 
are possible: why distinguish between VOLITIONAL and NON-VOLITIONAL result, and not 
between, say, IMMEDIATE and DELAYED result? In fact the notion of 'descriptive adequacy' 
seems to make little sense in isolation: in addition, it is necessary to specify a purpose for 
which the proposed escription is adequate. 
Psychological Rea l i ty  
One way that a purpose can be specified is by stipulating that relations model 'cognitive' 
constructs--that is, constructs which people actually use when they create and interpret 
text. On this conception, a description of the relations in a text becomes part of a theory 
of how the text originated, and why it is the way it is. This stipulation gives relations real 
explanatory power in a theory of discourse coherence: we could argue that it is because a 
48 
given set of relations is involved in text processing that we are able to use them to describe 
text. 
Claiming psychological reality for relations makes them amenable to empirical investiga- 
tion. Sanders, Spooren and Noordman \[3\] make the claim explicitly, and seek evidence for 
their proposed set of relations in psychological experiments on readers and writers. But these 
experiments are not without their own problems--it is questionable whether empirical exper- 
iment is a sharp enough tool to reveal fine-grained istinctions between relations. (Automatic 
text generation is one area where such fine-grained istinctions might well be necessary.) 
Cue Phrases 
Cue phrases (sentence connectives such as because and nevertheless) have been another in- 
fluence on the choice of a set of relations. Even in RST, where relations are defined with- 
out reference to surface linguistic phenomena, many correlations exist between relations and 
particular cue phrases. Hovy \[1\] makes more explicit use of cue phrases, taking them as 
'nonconclusive' evidence for a taxonomy of relations. 
However, while it is clear that a fine-grained classification of relations could indeed be 
constructed using cue phrases, the question of why relations should be linked to cue phrases 
has not been addressed in detail. Hovy's rationale concerns the practicalities of designing text 
planning systems; such a pragmatic approach has its advantages, but it would nonetheless 
be useful to think of a theoretical reason for linking relations to cue phrases. Without one, 
relations lack the kind of explanatory power they receive when thought of as psychological 
constructs. 
2 Cue  Phrases  as Ev idence  for Cogn i t ive  Const ructs  
I have suggested (Knott and Dale \[2\]) that it is possible to think of cue phrases as evidence 
for relations precisely if they are conceived as psychological constructs. The argument is 
basically that we can expect language to contain ways of making explicit any relations which 
are actually used by people when they process texts. If identifying relations is a component 
of text understanding, then it makes sense for there to be ways of signalling relations directly 
in text: it facihtates the tasks of both the reader and the writer. 
Of course it is often possible for a reader to identify a relation without the need for textual 
signals. But it seems unlikely that any relation exists that never needs to be textually marked. 
Unmarked relations can only be recognised if the reader has a certain amount of background 
knowledge about a text; and this knowledge can hardly be guaranteed in advance for all texts 
in which the relation can appear. If relations do play a part in human text comprehension, it 
is reasonable to suggest hat there exists a particular linguistic formula cr expression which 
can be used to distinguish each relation from all others. 
This claim, if accepted, would allow a taxonomy of relations to be built which has both 
49 
fine-grained etail and explanatory power. The explanatory power comes from the conception 
of relations as psychological entities: this conception in turn legitimises the use of cue phrases 
as evidence for relations, allowing a detailed taxonomy to be constructed. 
3 A. Methodo logy  fo r  Dec id ing  on  a Set  o f  Re la t ions  
On the basis of the above argument, a new methodology for determining a set of relations 
can be proposed: in essence, a relation is included in the set if a cue phrase can be found 
which picks it out. The starting point for this methodology is the assembly of a corpus of cue 
phrases. 
A study beginning from this point is reported in Knott and Dale \[2\]. We began by devising 
an informal test for identifying cue phrases in naturally-occurring discourse. Using the test, 
120 pages of academic articles and books were analysed, yielding a corpus of over 100 cue 
phrases. Following an idea by Hovy \[1\], this corpus was arranged into a taxonomy of synonyms 
and hyponyms: a portion of this taxonomy is shown in Figure 1. 
KEY 
I I 
I 
I 1 
Phrases in ~aug~ter category 
Can always be substituted 
for phrases in mother category 
/ \  
I 
Exclusive categories: phrases in 
one category will never be 
s.abstitutable forphrases in the other 
/ \ 
Phrases in one category may be 
substitutable for l~c~'ases in the other 
in certain contexts, but not always 
POSITION IN SEQUENCE I n~ nthly (n = l, 2, 3._) \[ 
START OF SEQUENCE NEXT STEP IN SEQUENCE 
to start with, and 
rust of all next 
to begin with than 
~o~ NEXT~ I ! STARTO~ NEXT ~ '~ I \  
TEMPORAL TEMPORAL SEQUENCE I / PRF.,SENATATIONAL PRESHqTATIONALSEQUENCE 
SEQUENCE ~ I I  sEQuENcE mo~o,er 
initially later I \[ for one thing furthermore 
in the beginning after (r~ntantlal dverb) \[ \[ In ~e first place what is more 
at the outset after that I I for a ~art in addition 
at Fast subsequently \[ I further 
mole X, more Xly 
? i 
LAST STEP IN LAST STEP IN 
TEMPORAL SEQUENCE PRESI~rrATIONAL SEQUENCE 
in the end I above all 
I most X, evenmaUy 
most Xly 
Figure 1: A Portion of the Taxonomy of Cue Phrases 
To illustrate the working of this taxonomy, consider the following patterns of substitutabil- 
ity. Initially and in the .first place can both be substituted by first of all; but they cannot 
be substituted for each other: in the first place is specific to 'presentational' sequences as 
initially is to 'temporal' sequences. 
50 
The labels in the boxes of the taxonomy are still just informal specifications: we are 
currently using the taxonomy to work out an isomorphic lassification of relations, complete 
with more formal definitions. It is productive to think of relations as feature-based constructs, 
and of the taxonomy as an inher i tance h ierarchy for features, such that daughter nodes 
inherit the features of their mothers, and are in addition specified for extra features. The 
substitutability data could then be seen as informing a decision about which features to use 
in relation definitions. 
The new taxonomy of relations is likely to have much in common with other taxonomies 
in the literature---although there may be some revealing additions and omissions. Indeed, the 
taxonomy of cue phrases can be seen as an interesting testbed for other theories of relations: 
can they explain the patterns of cue phrases which it describes? 
4 Conc lus ion  
This paper has presented a new way of justifying a set of relations, by viewing them as 
modelling psychological constructs and using cue phrases as evidence for these constructs. 
A corpus of cue phrases has been gathered and worked into a taxonomy, from which all 
isomorphic taxonomy of relations can be derived. 
The benefits of this methodology are considerable. To begin with, it sets out a systematic 
way to decide on a set of relations: any disagreement can be traced to a particular stage in 
the process, such as the decision that a word is a cue phrase, or the decision that two phrases 
are synonymous. Furthermore, the assumption of psychological reality gives the relations 
in the taxonomy a clear explanatory role in a theory of discourse coherence: they are not 
just 'purely descriptive' constructs. Finally, the methodology being proposed is incremental. 
Many important decisions about relation definitions--whether parameters hould be used, 
whether intentions need to be specified separately--can be deferred until after the taxonomy 
of cue phrases has been constructed: at this point, the taxonomy serves as a useful source of 
evidence for such decisions. 
References  
\[1\] E H Hovy. Parsimonious and profligate approaches to the question of discourse struc- 
ture relations. In Proceedings off the 5th International Workshop on Natural Language 
Generation, Pittsburgh, 1990. 
\[2\] A Knott and R Dale. Using linguistic phenomena to motivate a set of coherence relations. 
To appear in Discourse Processes. Also available as Technical Report RP-39, Human 
Communication Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, 1992. 
\[3\] T J M Sanders, W P M Spooren, and L G M Noordman. Towards a taxonomy of coherence 
relations. Discourse Processes, 15:1-35, 1992. 
51 
