hu Proceedings of the A CL-93 workshop on inteutiouality attd Structure in Discourse Relations, June 21, Colum- 
bus, Ohio 
The Representat ion  of  In terdependenc ies  between Communicat ive  Goa ls  and  
Rhetor i ca l  Re la t ions  in the  F ramework  of  Mu l t imed ia  Document  Generat ion  
Elisabeth A. Maier, Istituto per la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica (IRST), Trento, Italy 
maier@irst.it 
This paper briefly outlines observa.tions fi'om texts made with respect to rhetorical relations 
and communicative goals. Then it will be shown how these ol)servations have been encoded into 
knowledge resources which are part of an integrated architecture for the gelmration of multimedia 
output. 
Both communicative goals and rhetorical relations are virtual constructs - surface signals hint 
at their existence. In the following we briefly discuss the various linguistic means by which both 
rhetorical relations and communicative goals are signaled in texts. 
Identif ication of Rhetorical  Relations in Text 
For rhetorical relations urface signals are cue phrases like e.g. conjunctions. If no cue phrase 
exists for a relation lexical cohesion may play that role. 
Example  1: (Cue Phrase) 
When a pathway is used several times in succession, the threshohl falls. 
Example  2: (Lexical Cohesion) 
Water was all about thenl, was carrying them, was putting t\]|ell! down, was sinking, 
was ebbing away. 
In Example 1 the CONDITIONality ill the link between the two sentences i expressed by means 
of the conjunction when. In example 2, on the contrary, the SEQUENCE in the events reported is 
implicit in the verbs which can be inferred as temporally linked. This example also shows how 
a rhetorical relation contril)utes to the development of the topic and the progression of theme. 
\]t can be observed, ior instance, that the SEQUENCE relation preserves the theme over a chain 
of events (on that point see also \[Matthiessen a d Bateman, '91\]). 
Ident i f i ca t ion  of  Comnaun icat ive  Goa ls  in Text  
The phenomena for which comnmnicative goals are responsible axe quite (liIthrent. The effects 
of a communicative goal on a text unit can best 1)e observed wheu the text unit consists of 
various sentences. These sentences usually sha.re a nuutber of features which can be considered 
as characteristics of the goal at hand. 
1. Sentences "belonging" to the same communicative goal are centered around a global (para- 
graph) focus, which represents he overall topic of the text unit. 
2. Text units corresponding to the same communicative goal ca.u be characterized by the use 
of a restricted set of rhetorical relations - this is one way how communicative goals and 
rhetorical relations interact. 
70 
