Rhetorical Relations in Instructional Text Generation 
Keith Vander Linden 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, CO 80309-0430 
emaih l inden@cs.colorado.edu 
May 31, 1993 
The IMAGENE project has studied the expression of actions in the context of instructional 
text generation. The approach employs a rather traditional interpretation f Rhetorical Structure 
Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson, 1989), using it both as a descriptive tool and as a constructive 
tool (Mann and Thompson, 1987). No explicit representation f and reasoning about intentions 
was employed. In this light, the project can serve as a data point in the broader discussion of the 
use of rhetorical relations and of their interaction with intentions. 
This contribution will begin with a brief overview of the IMAGENE project 1, focusing on the 
nature of the use of RST in the project and, in particular, on the procedural basis of the inventory 
of rhetorical relations employed. It will conclude with a discussion of the precise characteristics 
of the project hat appear to have warranted the lack of specific oncern with Intentions. 
The  Use  o f  Re la t ions  
In the IMACENE project, instructional text is taken to refer exclusively to written, procedural direc- 
tions prescribing the performance some sequence of actions to the reader. This type of text can 
be seen as the expression of a set of actions bearing procedural relationships with one another. In 
this light, two tasks that an instructional text generator must perform are, first, to choose, for each 
action expression, the rhetorical relation it will hold with the other actions that best conveys their 
procedural relationships, and, secondly, to choose the precise grammatical form that will signal 
this rhetorical relation. 
It is tempting to address these two tasks at an intuitive level, identifying both the rhetorical 
status and the grammatical form that appear to most effectively express various types of actions 
and their relations. The problem with this approach isthat it is unclear how accurate our intuitions 
in this matter are. As an alternative, the IMACENE project was based on a detailed function to 
form study of a corpus of instructional texts, currently made up of approximately 1000 clauses 
of instructional text (6000 words) taken from manuals and instructions concerning a variety of 
devices and processes, taken from 17 different sources 2.This corpus is represented in a relational 
database representing the rhetorical and grammatical spects of the text. 
The corpus was analyzed and RST structures were built for all of the text. This analysis of 
rhetorical status made use of three nucleus-satellite relations: Purpose, Precondition, Result, and 
I More  detail can be found elsewhere (Vander Linden, 1993a; Vander Linden, 1993b). 
2This is in interesting contrast to the form to function study performed by Knott and Dale (1992). 
140 
(1) Instruct 
~ ~ $e uence  (2) Remove ~ q  
(3) Grasp. (4) Pull 
(5) Return (6) Place 
Figure 1: The RST Analysis for the Example. 
Instruct-Action Remove-Action Place-Action 
Action-Tylx~ Instruct Action-Tyix~ Remove Action-Type: Place-CaU 
Actor. Phone Actor. Hearer Actor: Hearer 
Actee: Hearer Actee: Phone Actee: Call 
m 
Grasp-Action Pull-Action 
Action-Type: Grasp Action-Type: Pull 
Actor. Hearer Actor. Hearer 
Actee: Handset Actee: Handset 
Return-Action 
Action-Type: Return 
Actor. Hearer 
Destination: Seat 
Figure 2: The Procedural Relations for the Example. 
two joint schemas: Sequence and Concurrent. The Purpose relation and the Sequence schema 
are taken directly from the RST specification. The Precondition and Result relations are simple 
amalgams of Circumstance and Condition, and Volitional and Non-Volitional Result respectively. 
The Concurrent schema is a simple extension of the Sequence schema. 
As an example, consider the following passage from a telephone instruction manual: 
\[1\] When instructed (approx. 10 sec.) \[2\] remove phone \[3\] by firmly grasping top of 
handset \[4\] and pulling out. \[5\] Return to seat \[6\] to place calls. 
The RST analysis for this text is shown in Figure 1. The procedural relationships that lie behind 
the expressions in this passage are shown in Figure 2. 
This set of relations and schemas, which has proven effective in analyzing instructional text, 
is based on the notions of hierarchical nd non-linear plans and the use of preconditions and 
postconditions in automated planners 3.During descriptive analysis, Purpose is identified with the 
expression of what is called the generation relationship (Goldman, 1970). Precondition and Result 
3See Mellish and Evans (1988) for a discussion of the these issues are they relate to text generation. 
141 
are identified with the expression of actions as pre or post-conditions for other actions. Sequence 
schemas are identified with the expression of sequential ctions and, similarly, Concurrent schemas 
with the expression of concurrency. 
Given this coding of the rhetorical status of action expressions, coupled with the coding of 
the grammatical form of the expressions, a functional analysis was performed which identified 
systematic co-variation between functions and forms in the corpus. It turned out that a set of 
approximately 70 features of the communicative environment--  in terms of Systemic-Functional 
Linguistics, elements of the ideational, textual, and interpersonal metafunctions (Halliday, 1985) 
were sufficient to produce abroad analytical coverage of the rhetorical status and grammatical 
forms used in the corpus. These features were then coded in a single system network which 
formed the basis of the constructive use of RST within the IMACENE instructional text generation 
system. 
Where Intentions Fit In 
Given that Moore and Pollack's (1992) examples of the need for simultaneous representation f 
relations and intentions are so compelling, there must some explanation of why the IMAGENE 
project was successful within the orthodox RST tradition. This concluding section will suggest 
two characteristics of the IMACENE study that appear to have been instrumental in this regard and 
discuss their implications for the appropriate roles of relations and intentions. 
The first characteristic of the IMACENE project was its focus on local rhetorical relations in 
written instructional text in English. There are a number of sub-issues related to this focus of 
concern, all of which tend to lend themselves toa traditional RST approach: 
Written rather than interactive discourse D A number of studies in the context of interactive 
discourse have emphasized the need for separate representation f intentions (Fox, 1988; 
Grosz and Sidner, 1986; Moore and Paris, 1989). This mechanism allows the system to deal 
with, for example, conversational repair, an issue which is not prevalent in written text. 
Instructional text rather than other genres - -  Instructional text does not tend to make use of the 
deep and multi-faceted intentions that are common in argumentative and persuasive text 
(such as was the case in the "Come home by 5:00" example cited by Moore and Pollack). 
Instructional texts tend to be more straight forward expressions ofactions and the procedural 
relations among them. In fact, the definition of the instructional genre itself makes reference 
to the single fundamental intention of expressing a procedure in an effective way (termed 
the "deep" intention by Delin et al (1993)), an intention which has manifested itself in a 
number of standardized, omain-specific forms of expression commonly used by technical 
writers (termed Domain Communication K owledge by Kittredge t al. (1991)). 
Local rather than global relations - -  Not only did the IMACENE project specifically address in- 
structional text, but it has exclusively addressed the use of local rhetorical relations. Quite 
often the difficulty observed with RST analyses has been at higher levels. 
The second, and perhaps most significant characteristic of the IMAGENE project is its focus on 
the problems of rhetorical status election and grammatical form selection. No attempt was made 
to address the issue of content selection, indeed the corpus-based methodology employed would 
not provide a completely satisfying basis on which to address this issue. IMAGENE takes as input 
a process tructure, such as the one shown in Figure 2, and does very little reasoning concerning 
142 
what to say (aside from pruning the process tree structure in some cases). This issue of content 
selection appears to be a crucial contribution of intentions. 
References 
Delin, J., Scott, D., and Hartle~ T. (1993). Knowledge, intention, rhetoric: Levels of variation in 
multilingual instructions. In this volume. 
Fox, B. A. (1988). Robust learning environments: The issue of canned text. Technical Report 88-5, 
Institute of Cognitive Science, The University of Colorado. 
Goldman, A. I. (1970). A Theory of Human Action. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Grosz, B. J. and Sidner, C. L. (1986). Attention, intentions, and the structure of discourse. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 12(3). 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). An Introduction to Functional Grammar. Edward Arnold, London. 
Kittredge, R., Korelsky, T., and Rambow, O. (1991). On the need for domain communication 
knowledge. Computational Intelligence, 7(4):305--314. 
Knott, A. and Dale, R. (1992). Using linguistic phenomena to motivate a set of rhetorical rela- 
tions. Technical Report HCRC/RP-39, Human Communication Research Centre, University 
of Edinburgh. 
Mann, W. C. and Thompson, S. A. (1987). Rhetorical structure theory: Description and construction 
of text structures. In Kempen, G., editor, Natural Language Generation: New Results in Artificial 
Intelligence, Psychology, and Linguistics. NATO Scientific Affairs Division, Martinus Nijhoff. 
Mann, W. C. and Thompson, S. A. (1989). Rhetorical structure theory: A theory of text organization. 
In Polanyi, L., editor, The Structure of Discourse. Ablex, Norwood, NJ. To appear, currently 
available as ISI tech. report ISI/RS-87-190. 
MeUish, C. (1988). Natural anguage generation from plans. In Zock, M. and Sabah, G., editors, 
Advances in Natural Language Generation An Interdisciplinary Prespective, volume 1, chapter 7. 
Ablex. Selected readings from the 1st European NLG Workshop, the Abbaye de Rouaumont, 
1987. 
Moore, J. D. and Paris, C. L. (1989). Planning text for advisory dialogues. In Proceedings ofthe 27th 
Annual Meeting of Association for Computational Linguistics, 26-29 June, vancouver, B.C. Also 
available as ISI tech. report ISI/RR-89-236. 
Moore, J. D. and Pollack, M. E. (1992). A problem for RST: The need for multi-level discourse 
analysis. Computational Linguistics, 18(4):537-544. Squibs and Discussions. 
Vander Linden, K. (1993a). Generating effective instructions. In Proceedings ofthe Fifteenth Annual 
Conference ofthe Cognitive Science Society, June 18-21, Boulder, CO. To appear. 
Vander Linden, K. (1993b). Speaking of Actions: Choosing Rhetorical Status and Grammatical Form in 
Instructional Text Generation. PhD thesis, University of Colorado. 
143 
