Semant ic  Lexicons:  the Corners tone  for Lex ica l  Cho ice  
in Natura l  Language Generat ion  
Evelyne Viegast Pierrette Bouillon? 
viegas~cs.brandeis.edu pb~divsun.unige.ch 
tComputer Science Department, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02254 USA 
?ISSCO, University of Geneva, 54 route des Acacias, CH-1227 Geneva, Switzerland 
Abstract 
In this paper, we address the issue of integrating seman- 
tic lexicons into NLG systems and argue that the problem 
of lexical choice in generation can be approached only by 
such an integration. We take the approach of Generative 
Lexicon Theory (GLT) (Pnstejovsky, 1991, 1994c) which 
provides a system involving four levels of representation 
connected by a set of generative devices accounting for a 
compositional interpretation of words in context. We are 
interested in showing that we can reduce the set of col- 
locations listed in the lexicon by introducing the notion 
of "semantic ollofations" which can be predicted within 
GLT framework. We argue that the lack of semantic well- 
defined calculi in previous approaches, whether linguistic 
or conceptual, renders them unable to account for seman- 
tic collocations. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Whether we talk of monolingual or multilingual gen- 
eration, it is not surprising that there has been very 
little focus on the area of lexical choice. Lexical choice 
has often been side-stepped, not because it is a daunt- 
ing issue, but rather because the interest in natural 
language generation (NLG) first focused on syntactic, 
morphological nd discourse aspects of language. Se- 
mantic accuracy has been therefore sacrificed in the 
production of fluent grammaticalsentences. In section 
2, we highlight the issue of lexical choice, by arguing 
that generation systems must integrate lexical seman- 
tics and focusing on the treatment of Adjective-noun 
(Adj-Noun) collocations. We introduce the notion of 
"semantic ollocations", which allows us to reduce the 
set of collocations which are usually listed in lexicons. 
In section 3, we present relevant aspects of the Genera- 
tive Lexicon Theory (GLT), which, we argue, provides 
a better representation and interpretation of lexical 
information, enabling us to generate the set of possi- 
ble semantic ollocations in a predictive way without 
listing them in lexical entries. GLT is still under de- 
velopment from a theoretical point of view and up to 
now no generation system (as far as the authors are 
We would llke to thank Susan Armstrong, Paul Buitelaar, 
Federica Busa, Dominique Estival, James Pustejovsky, Graham 
Russell and Scott Waterman for their helpful comments. 
aware) has tried to integrate or implement its ideas. 
We propose to do so, and are currently studying its 
theoretical adequacy for generation with special ref- 
erence to the issue of lexical choice. In section 4, we 
show that it is possible to calculate Adj-Noun seman- 
tic collocations ( a long book; an easy novel; a fast car) 
as opposed to the type of collocations where idiosyn- 
crasy seems to be involved (a large coke vs. a big coke). 
Finally, in section 5, we emphazise the adequacy of a 
framework such as GLT to generate the possible set 
of semantic ollocations. 
2 The  Issue of  Lex ica l  Cho ice  
There is a debate in NLG concerning the place of lex- 
ical choice in the generation process. Should lexical 
choice take place at the level of the "planning com- 
ponent" or the "realization component"? Even for 
generators which do not have a "traditional" two- 
component architecture, actions are still sequential 
and lexical choice takes place after some "planning". 
Lexical choice relates to lexicalization in the sense 
of not only needing to pick up the right words or ex- 
pressions but also of needing to "realize" them or lex- 
icalize them. We would argue on one hand that lexi- 
calization does not constitute an autonomous module 
within the process of generation, and on the other 
hand that lexical choice is not the sole prerogative 
of either the "planning" or the "realization" compo- 
nent. The reason is that a concept cannot be seen 
in isolation (the choice of a particular concept will 
trigger some other related concepts) and when lexi- 
calized, the syntactico-semantics of the lexical item 
will impose some constraints on the further possible 
choice of concepts to be lexicalized (thus constraining 
the set of concepts triggered by the previous one). In 
other words in the process of production a lexical  
choice can in f luence a conceptua l  cho ice  and  
vice versa.  
Thus in terms of NLG this means that lexical choice 
has some influence at the level of "planning" and "re- 
91 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
alization". Moreover, if we want to generate in an 
incremental way, it follows that a strict distinction be- 
tween these two components can no longer hold, and 
that we must attempt either to bridge gaps between 
them (Meteer 1992) or to generate in a partly parallel 
fashion. 
In this paper, we take the view of integrating lex- 
ical semantics in the design of the lexicon to be 
used in an NLG system, in order to perform the 
right lexicalizations. We define lexicalization as a 
complex dynamic process, by which we find the ap- 
propriate lexicalized items for utterances, in order 
to fulfill communicative goals. In fact, we think 
that we use a backward  and  fo rward  process  
between concepts and lexical items and we believe 
that it is through incrementa l  ( re) lex iea l i zat ions-  
( re )conceptua l l za t ions  that we perform well- 
formed linguistic realizations (Viegas, 1993). 
In the following, after a brief overview of the issue 
of lexical choice, we focus on the treatment of colloca- 
tions, which poses the problem of complex lexicaliza- 
tions, and motivates the need of taking into account, 
in the process of lexicalizing, both several concepts 
and several exical items. 
2 .1  D i f fe rent  Approaches  
Roughly speaking, the issue of lexical choice has 
been investigated mainly along two different lines: a 
conceptual-based approach (mainly in the AI tradi- 
tion) and a linguistic-based approach. 1 
Despite these efforts, lexical choice remains a burn- 
ing issue. We agree with McKeown and Swartout 
(1988) when they say that: "... a truly satisfactory 
theoretical approach for lexical choice has yet to be 
developed." However, like some leading researchers 
in generation, we argue that it is of paramount im- 
portance to f irst know the kind of information that 
should be coded in the lexicon, which means to pay 
more attention to "the nature of words" (McDonald, 
1988) and to have a "real knowledge of \[the\] lexical 
semantics", as was pointed out by Marcus (1987): 
"In some important sense, \[the\] systems have 
no real knowledge of lexical semantics . . . .  
They use fragments of linguistic structure 
which eventually have words as their fron- 
tiers, but have little or no explicit knowledge 
of what these words mean." 
In this article, we will not give a review of the issue 
of the lexical choice; it is enough to say that the lexical 
semantic omponent for lexical representation is still 
1Robin's report (1990) presents a good survey on "Lexical 
Choice in NLG". See also (Reiter, 1991) and (Nogier and Zock, 
1992) for a comprehensive study of the evolution made in the 
field. 
basically unused and that there is a need to tackle 
that issue if we want to give some new and promising 
impetus to the study on lexical choice. 
2 .2  The  Treatment  o f  Co l locat ions  
There is much divergence of opinion on just what the 
defining criteria for collocations are. One can min- 
imally define a collocation as the distribution of an 
object or element in relation to other objects or ele- 
ments, as dictionaries do; needless to say, apart from 
remaining vague, at best this does not provide any 
clue for finding them operationally. 
There are three main approaches to the study of 
collocations, namely, lexicographic, statistical and lin- 
guistic: in each of these, the term collocation is used 
differently. 
The traditional approach to collocations has been 
lex lcographic .  Here dictionaries provide informa- 
tion about what is unpredictable or idiosyncratic. 
Benson (1989) synthesizes Hausmann's studies on col- 
locations (Hausmann, 1979), calling expressions such 
as commit murder, compile a dictionary, inflict a 
wound, etc. "fixed combinations, recurrent combina- 
tions" or "collocations". In Hausmann's terms a collo- 
cation is composed of two elements, a base ("Basis") 
and a collocate ("Kollokator"); the base is semanti- 
cally autonomous whereas the collocate cannot be se- 
mantically interpreted in isolation. In other words 
the set of lexical collocates which can combine with 
a given base is not predictable and collocations must 
therefore be listed in dictionaries. 
In recent years, there has been a resurgence of 
s tat is t ica l  approaches applied to the study of nat- 
ural languages. Sinclair (1991) states that "a word 
which occurs in close proximity to a word under in- 
vestigation is called a collocate of it . . .  Collocation is 
the occurrence of two or more words within a short 
space of each other in a text". The problem is that 
with such a definition of collocations, even when im- 
proved, one identifies not only collocations but free- 
combining pairs frequently appearing together such 
as lawyer-client; doctor-hospital, as pointed out by 
Smadja (1993). 
There has been no real focus on collocations from a 
l inguist ic  perspective. The lexicon has been broadly 
sacrificed by both English-speaking schools and con- 
tinental European schools. The scientific agenda of 
the former has been largely dominated by syntactic 
issues until recently whereas the latter was more con- 
cerned with pragmatic aspects of natural languages. 
The focus has been largely on grammatical collo- 
cations such as adapt to, aim at, look for. Lakoff 
(1970) distinguishes a class of expressions which can- 
not undergo certain operations, such as nominaliza- 
tion, causativization: the problem is hard; *the hard- 
92 
7th International Generation'Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
ness of the problem; *the problem hardened. Restric- 
tions on the application of certain syntactic operations 
can help define collocations such as hard problem, for 
example. One specific proposal for how to treat collo- 
cations in a linguistic model is developed in Mel'~uk's 
work on lexical functions (Mel'~uk, 1988). 
In this theory, lexicM knowledge is encoded in an 
entry of the Exp lanatory  Combinator ia l  Dictlo- 
nary,  each entry being divided into three zones: the 
semantic zone (a semantic network representing the 
meaning of the entry in terms of more primitive 
words), the syntactic zone (the grammatical proper- 
ties of the entry) and the lexical combinatorics zone 
(containing the values of the Lexical  Funct ions 
(LFs)) ~. LFs are central to the study of collocations 
and can be defined as the following : a lexicalfunction 
F is a correspondence which associates a lexical item 
L, called the key word of F, with a set of lexical items 
F(L) - the value of F (Mel'~uk, 1988). 
The LF Magn,  for example, applies to different 
categories to deliver collocational values, expressing 
an intensity: 
Magn(smoker) = heavy \[smoker\] 
Magn(opposed)-= strongly/vehemently \[opposed\] 
Magn(large) = excessively \[large\] 
The Mel'~ukian approach is very interesting as it 
provides a model of production well suited for gener- 
ation with its different strata and also a lot of lexical- 
semantic information. It suffers nevertheless from 
three main problems (Heylen et al, 1993). First, all 
the collocational information must be listed in a static 
way, because the theory does not provide any pre- 
dictable calculus of the possible xpressions which can 
collocate with each other semantically. Second, it is 
sometimes difficult o assign the right lexical functions 
for newly analyzed lexical items; if we take the exam- 
ple of assigning an LF to an Adj-Noun structure, it in- 
volves knowing something about the semantic relation 
which exists between adjective and noun. (Bloksma 
et al, 1993) state that "It is precisely this informa- 
tion which in many cases proves extremely difficult to 
establish, simply because it is just not entirely clear 
what semantic processes are involved in the union of 
adjective and noun". 
Finally, sometimes LFs are too general to be useful, 
as shown in the following examples: 
Magn t'mp (experience) = lengthy 
Magn quant (experience) = considerable 
Magn,on,,q~nc,, (illness) = serious 
In these cases, superscripts and subscripts are 
needed to restrict the scope of the LF: they enhance 
the precision of the LFs, making them sensitive to 
2See (Iordanskaja, et al, 1991) and (Ramos et al, 1994), 
concerning the use of MTT and LFs in NLG respectively. 
meaning aspects of the lexical items on which they 
operate, thus constraining overgeneration f multiple 
values; yet this also shows that the set of LFs de- 
scribed is not sufficient. 
By contrast, our general thesis is that there is no 
single definition for what a collocation is, but rather, 
co l locat ional  behav ior  emerges  f rom a theory  
of  what  the  range  of  connect ions  and  re lat ions  
between lexical i tems can be. We claim that much 
of the allegedly idiosyncratic and language-specific 
collocation in language is in fact predictable from a 
sufficiently rich theory of lexical organization. This 
is not to say that there is no need for specific lex- 
ical encoding of some idioms and phrases, but that 
there is seldom any attempt made to bridge the gap 
between conventional semantic selection and the pe- 
ripheral phenomena of collocations and fixed expres- 
sions. 
We will make the distinction between the following 
kinds of combinations: 
F ree -Combin ing  Words:  ( a big stick; a wonderful 
man; there is an old man at the door) 
Semant ic  Col locat ions:  (a fast car; a long book; to 
start a car) 
Id iosyncrat ic  Lexical  Co-occurrences:  (a heavy 
smoker vs. un grand fumeur (French); un 
grand/gros mangeur (French) vs. un gran/~gordo 
comelon (Spanish)) 
Id ioms: (to kick the bucket; take advantage o\]). 
Formally, this takes us from purely compositional 
constructions of "free-combining words" to the non- 
compositional structures in idioms. The vast space 
between these two extremes can still be explained in 
terms of compositional principles with mechanisms 
from GLT such as type coercion and subselection 
(Pustejovsky, 1991, 1993), as we shall see below. Id- 
iosyncrasies, of course, should be listed in the lexicon, 
yet we believe that we can reduce the set of what 
are conventionally considered idiosyncrasies by differ- 
entiating "true" idiosyncrasies (which cannot be de- 
rived or generated) from expressions which, since they 
are compositional in nature, behave predictably, and 
which we call semantic ollocations. 
3 Generat ive Lex icon  Theory  
The Generative Lexicon Theory (GLT) (Pustejovsky, 
1991, 1994c) can be said to take advantage ofboth lin- 
guistic and conceptual approaches, providing a frame- 
work which arose from the integration of linguistic 
studies and of techniques found in AI. GLT can be 
briefly characterized as a system which involves four 
93 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
levels of representation which are connected by a set 
of generative devices accounting for a compositional 
interpretation of words in context, namely: the argu-  
ment  s t ructure  which specifies the predicate argu- 
ment structure for a word and the conditions under 
which the variables map to syntactic expressions; the 
event  s t ructure  giving the particular event types 
such as S (state), P (process) or T (transition); the 
qual ia  s t ruc ture  distributed among four roles FORM 
(formal), CONST (constitutive), TELIC and AGENT 
(Agentive); and the inheritance structure which 
involves two different kinds of mechanisms: 
? the fixed inheritance mechanism, which is basi- 
cally a fixed network of the traditional isa rela- 
tionship found in AI, enriched with the different 
roles of the qualia structure; 
? the projective inheritance mechanism, which can 
be intuitively characterized as a way of trigger- 
ing semantically related concepts which define for 
each role the projective conclusion space (PCS). 
For instance in the PCS of the telic and agen- 
tive roles of book we will find at least the follow- 
ing predicates: read, reissue, annotate, ... and 
write, print, bind, . . .  (respectively) 3. 
The most important of the generative devices con- 
necting these four levels is a semantic operation 
called type coercion which "captures the semantic re- 
latedness between syntactically distinct expressions" 
(Pustejovsky, 1994a). Another notion introduced is 
that of lexical conceptual paradigms (LCPs), as for- 
malized in (Pustejovsky, 1994b). We will say that the 
aim of an LCP is to capture the conceptual regularities 
across languages in terms of cognitive invariants, like 
"physical-object", "aperture", "natural kind" and al- 
ternations uch as "container/containee", etc. More- 
over, the possible syntactic projections are associated 
with LCPs. For instance, one can say "I left a leaflet 
in / ins ide  the book at the page I want you to read' as 
book is an information-phys_obj-container whereas for 
instance one cannot say "I put the book in the top of 
the table" as "the top of the table" is a surface and 
not a container 4. 
In the following, we will focus on two basic mecha- 
nisms of GLT, which allow us to bridge the word usage 
gap, that is, on a scale of lexical specificity, from free- 
combining words to idioms. These are: 
(1) Reference to the qualia structure: By giving ev- 
ery category the ability to make reference to spe- 
3Thls issue is still unsettled in GLT. Our point however, 
being to show how to predict Adj-Noun semantic ollocations, 
our discussion will not suffer from that lack. 
4We follow Dubois and Pereita (1993) in their analysis of 
categorization in relation with cognition. 
cific semantic functions, we are encoding the "se- 
mantic basis" of word usage information with a 
lexical item. This gives rise to semantic olloca- 
tions. 
(2) Cospecification: This is the basic means of encod- 
ing specific usage information in the form of ei- 
ther coherent argument subtypes, or already lex- 
icalized phrases, giving rise to idiosyncrasies and 
idioms, respectively. 
4 Adject ival  Semant ic  
Col locat ions w i th in  GLT 
4.1 The Semant ics  of Nomina ls  
We illustrate these theoretical notions with some ex- 
amples for nominals 5, paying particular attention to 
"covert-relational nominals ''6, that is, those exhibit- 
ing a logical polysemy. We only present partial en- 
tries, which however exhibit semantic information dis- 
tributed among the qualia, thus allowing the predic- 
tion of semantic ollocations as will be shown in 4.2. 
We give some realizations for beer  and wr i te r  and 
discuss their representationsZ: 
South African Breweries Ltd., or SAB, the country's 
largest producer of beer, was hit by a strike at seven of 
its 11 breweries around the country. 
"I am a beer-drinker with a running problem," one hash 
lapel button re~tds. 
beer 
ARGSTR = \[ ARGI  = X: beverage  \] 
\[ l iquid-LCP \] 
IFORM = beer-liquid(x) | 
QUALIA = |.TELIC = drink(P,v : individual ,x) | 
\ [AGENT= produce(T,w:brewer,x) J 
Ms. Rifkind is a writer and editor living in New York. 
Mr. Ferguson is an editorial writer for Scripps Howard 
News Service in Washington, D.C. 
writer 
ARGSTR = \[ ARGI  = x:author'\[ 
| human-LCP  \] 
J 
= |FORM = htman(x)  L QUALIA 
L TELIC = wr i te (T ,x ,v : text )  
5For a broader account of the semantic interpretation of 
nominals, including nominalizations, see Pustejovsky and Anick 
(1988). 
sWe use "covert" to differentiate traditional relational nom- 
inals (such as/ f iend,  father, cousin), from the class of nouns . 
which exhibit a polysemous behaviour (such as book, door, 
record}. 
7We mainly use the approach to typed feature structures 
as described in Carpenter (1992). We cannot develop here the 
way the information is inherited in the partial lexical entries 
presented. 
94 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
The argument structure of nouns encodes argu- 
ments which are to be taken as logical parameters pro- 
viding type information for lexical items as discussed 
in (Pustejovsky, 1994a). The predicates "drink", 
"produce", and "write", are the defaults we find in the 
qualia of beer  and wr i te r  respectively. It is still pos- 
sible to create the semantic space which these pred- 
icates belong to, through the projective inheritance 
mechanism. 
In the cases of covert-relational nominals, exhibit- 
ing semantic polysemy, we argue that they have actu- 
ally well-defined calculi. If we look at examples (1): 
(1) a. This book is heavy to carry around. 
(physical object) 
b. I read an angry book. (text) 
c. This book is great! 
(text and/or physical object) 
(la) and (lb) illustrate the polysemy between the 
physical object and the notion of text, whereas (lc) 
can either efer to one or both aspects within the same 
sentence. 
Traditional approaches, from transformational 
grammars to classical Montague grammars, account 
for this lexical ambiguity by postulating different 
entries per lexical item. These fail to capture 
the core semantics of the lexical items, leaving the 
complemenlary s senses unrelated. Following Puste- 
jovsky (1994b) we suggest that covert relational nomi- 
nals should have a relational structure, thus capturing 
polysemy within the lexical structure. 
For the purpose of clarity We only give a partial rep- 
resentation of book below: 
"book  
ARGSTR = 
QUALIA = 
ARG1 = x:text \] 
ARG2 y:paperj 
" ln format \ ]on-phys_ob j -conta \ ]ner -LCP"  
FORM = book.hold(y,x) 
TELIC = read(T,w:individual,x),  
publ ish(T,v:publisher,y) 
AGENT = write(T,u:writer,x), 
print(T,z:printer,y) 
Briefly, this states that book inherits from the rela- 
tional information-physical_object-container-Lcp, al- 
though imposing additional constraints of its own, 
represented here as the arguments, namely ARG 1 and 
AR62. Moreover, we have specified two defaults for 
the telic and agentive roles, each refering to one as- 
pect of book, either text  or physical_object .  The 
8Weinreieh (1964) makes the distinction between contrastlvc 
and complementary ambiguity. A noun such as record exhibits 
the former type between the readings written statement o\]\]acts 
and gramophone record or disc, and the latter between the 
complementary interpretation of physical object and musical 
content. 
sorts publisher, writer, printer are organized hierar- 
chically with individual as a common super-type. 
This nominal representation e ables us to capture 
all the complementary nominal "polysemous" senses 
as expressed in the sentences: The writer began his 
third book (writing), my sister began "The Bostoni- 
ans" (reading); the binder finished the books for CUP 
(binding), etc. The values of these qualia are typed 
and are accessible to semantic operations in composi- 
tion with other phrases. One aspect of nominal rep- 
resentation to be captured with this formalism is the 
paradigmatic behavior of a lexical item in the syntax, 
and help understanding the processes involved in lexi- 
cal selection tasks. In the next section, we address the 
issue of selection within the NP, and show the utility 
of having qualia structure associated with nouns and 
adjectives for compositional purposes, focusing on se- 
mantic collocations. 
4.2 Ad j -Noun In terpreta t ion  
Within the approach taken here, adjectives, depend- 
ing on their types, will be able to modify not only 
the arguments of the argument structure of the nouns 
(ARGSTR), but also the arguments inside the agen- 
tive and the telic roles. As the information in the 
qualia is specific to the noun and as the same adjective 
can modify different roles, it is possible to deal with 
the polysemous behavior of adjectives and to provide 
a generative xplanation of semantic ollocations. 
Very briefly, an adjective selects for a particular 
type, an event or an object. When it modifies an ob- 
ject, it selects for a particular semantic type (person, 
vehicle, information, etc.). When it takes an event, 
it can be restricted to a special type (process, event, 
transition) or role (agentive or telic). If the noun does 
not have in its argument structure the type required 
by the adjective, generative mechanisms can exploit 
the richness of typing of the qualia and generate the 
required type (Pustejovsky, 1994a), if it is available 
in the qualia and if common sense knowledge is re- 
spected. In this case, the adjective will only modify 
one part of the qualia (i.e. of the denotation) of the 
noun. 
Consider, for example, the French adjectives intelli- 
gent (clever) and lriste (sad) in (2). We give, for each 
example, the English literal translations (lit. tr.): 
(2) a. un homme intelligent/triste; (lit. tr. a 
clever/sad man) 
b. des yeuz intelligents/tristes; (lit. tr. clever/sad 
eyes) ~ which show the cleverness/sadness of the 
person in question 
c. un livre intelligent/triste; (lit. tr. clever/sad 
book) ~ book which shows the clever- 
ness/sadness of the person who writes the book 
95 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
d. un livre intelligent/triste ~ book which causes 
the *cleverness/sadness of the person who reads 
it 
e. un sapin triste; (lit. tr. a sad fir-tree) 
---~ *fir-tree that causes the sadness of the person 
who . . . 
f. nne voiture triste; (lit. tr. a sad car) ~ *car 
that causes the sadness of the person who con- 
structs it 
g. une robe triste; (lit. tr. a sad dress) ---~ *that 
causes the sadness of the person who wears it 
These adjectives elect for an object of type person 
(as shown in (2a)): 
tr iste 
ARCl - \[\] person 
\[ change.state-LeP 1 
QUALIA \[ FORM = ,,i.,~C~ s. \[\] ) J 
In (2bcd), despite the apparent violation of types, 
the modification is possible, because the qualia of the 
noun makes explicit different relations between the 
type person selected by the adjective (Type-Adj) and 
the noun (N), as: 
? (N) is a constitutive element of (Type-Adj) (ex- 
ample (2b)) 
? the telic stipulates that (Type-Adj) uses (N) (ex- 
ample (2d)) 
? the agentive stipulates that (N) is produced by 
(Type-gdj)  (example (2c)) 
It must be clear that this kind of modification is 
only possible if the relations are defined in the qualia. 
The sentence (2e), for example, is semantically diffi- 
cult, as the word sapin, as a natural kind, has no telic 
or agentive roles (independently of particular con- 
texts). The modication must also respect very general 
common sense knowledge: in (2e) and (2g), the read- 
ings ? a book that causes the cleverness of the person 
who reads it (2e) and *a dress that causes the sadness 
of the person who wears it (2g) is blocked by common 
sense principles, like: 
? cleverness cannot be communicated, unlike sad- 
ness 
? there must be a direct causal link between the 
event expressed in the telic/agentive role and the 
sadness of the individual. This link does not re- 
late in our societies adness and wearing a par- 
ticular dress or building a car. 
Take now the case of long. This adjective, in one of 
its senses, modifies an event transition, whose it indi- 
cates the temporal duration, as shown in the examples 
(3): 
(3) a. le long voyage (the long trip) 
b. nn long livre (a long book) ---~ whose read- 
ing/writing is long 
It will therefore receive the following entry: 
I long 
QUALIA I dimensi?n-LCP \] 
\[FORM = , . . , (~)  J 
(3b) is therefore possible because vents are defined 
in the qualia of the noun livre. Again, un long sapin 
has no event reading, because there is no event avail- 
able in the qualia of the noun sapin. 
The adjectives ancient and former are also event 
submodifiers, distinguished by the role they modify. 
Ancient is a relative adjective that submodifies the 
agentive role of the modified noun: 
ancient 
 oRM= , ,  . . . . . .  
In this view, ancient stories (in example (3)) are 
stories which were narrated in the past, so: 
distant_past (er )  A narrate(e T , z, stories) 
By contrast, the English adjective former is a prop- 
erty modifier and can only modify the telic role of the 
noun: 
former 
QUALIA \[change..stat e-LOP \[FORM = p..,(~) 
A former architect is a person who performed his 
job in the past 9, so:. 
past(e P) A perform_the_job_of_architect (e P, z) 
In French, two adjectives with the same mean- 
ing past can modify these two roles: ancien and 
vieuz, which will receive the following feature struc- 
ture (which does not deal with the absolute sense): 
vleux 
QUALIA \[change_st ate-LCP \] 
LFORM = p-.,(\[~) J 
9Let P be any predicate, from the qualla of the noun, and 
< ei >, a set of ordered events; the semantics associated to past 
is then the following: 
past (e l )  AP(e l ,x ,y )  A -~P(e2 ,x ,y )  Anow(e2)  Ae  I < e2. 
96 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
That is not to say that these two adjectives will 
be ambiguous in context. We show elsewhere (Bouil- 
lon and Viegas, 1994) that the interpretation of the 
adjective can be influenced by the context or morpho- 
logical and syntactical constraints as the place of the 
French adjective, the type of the determiner or the 
typography (hyphen or quotes). 
Within this approach, semantic ollocations can be 
therefore computed in the same way as other Adj- 
Noun constructions and do not need to be listed in 
the dictionary. 
5 Perspect ives for NLG 
With GLT, we can generate dynamically the set of 
possible semantic ollocations. This can be done in- 
crementally, as we make available the set of possible 
choices at run-time, a set which will be constrained 
by the situational and/or contextual environment. 
Suppose that we are generating Adj-Noun construc- 
tions from logical forms. From a structure like the 
following: 
By, z, e T livre(y) A lire(e T, x, y) A long(e T) 
we can generate two sentences: the non-collocational 
one un livre long h life (lit. tr. a book long to read) 
and the collocational one un long livre (a long book), 
because the entries of the noun and the adjective in 
GL specify that this combination is possible. 
In contrast, we will not be able to generate from the 
logical form below une robe triste (a Sad dress) with 
the meaning of a dress which makes me sad because 
this NP is blocked by the common sense principles 
evocated in the previous ection. 
3y, x, e T, e s robe(y) A porter(e T, x, y) A 
causer(e T , e S) A triste(e s, x) 
That is not to say that we can predict generatively 
all collocations. Take the examples of Adj-Noun collo- 
cations involving grand and gros with nouns denoting 
activities: 
(4) a. un grand/gros mangeur (a big eater) 
b. un grand/gros fraudeur (a big smuggler) 
c. un *grand/gros client (a big client) 
d. un grand/*gros fumeur (a heavy smoker) 
e. un grand/*gros professeur (a great professor) 
Here, grand and gros are intensifiers of the predicate 
in the telic. Un grandfumeur, for example, will receive 
the following interpretation : 
Az\[f  umeur( x) . . . \[Telic( z ) = 
AvAeP\[furner(e P, x, v: tabac) A grand(e P) \]\]\] 
We can predict that gros is intensifier of the quan- 
titative aspect of the predicate while grand will mod- 
ify both qualitative (4e) and quantitative aspects 
(4abcd), depending on the salience of these aspects 
in the predicate (we can assume that a professor is 
generally judged by the quality of his courses, while 
a smoker by the quantity of the smoking). What we 
cannot do is to predict which adjective will be used 
with preference for the quantitative aspects. 
To deal with this set of idiosyncratic lexical co- 
occurrences and idioms, we must take the concept of 
collocational information a step further, with a theory 
of cospecification. This takes advantage of linguistic, 
statistical and lexicographic approaches ( ee 2.2), but 
also adds the dimension of semantic typing, focusing 
on collocations as they relate to sortal selection. 
For instance, the cospecifications associated with 
the predicates we find in the telic of book, namely read, 
has encoded sortal pairs, providing the privileged en- 
vironment (or associations) for that word: 
" read  
COSPECS = cosPEci \[ARol : i?d.idu  \]1 
ARG2 = in fo rmat ion  
In the cases of grand fumeur versus gros mangeur, 
we know that the telic offumeur and mangeur (ruiner 
and manger) are predicates, denoting activities of 
type process, on which we can apply a scale (tr~s 
pen .... beaucoup .. .  dnormdment . . . ) .  The adjective 
which will express a point on the scale with a specific 
noun will be specified in the cospecifications (as be- 
low). In fact, both grand and gros can generally be 
understood, with sometimes a clear preference for one 
of these, depending of the term being modified. This 
preference is modelled as a partial ordering () over a 
type hierarchy < Cospec, E> , encoded in the cospec- 
ifications. 
*mangeur 
COSPECS = 
COSPEC1 = SCALE = gros(e P) \] 
/ COsPEC2 = SCALE= grand(eP)\] 
k RESTRICT = cospec, C cospecj, i < j 
6 Conclusion 
By working within the framework of GLT (Puste- 
jovsky, 1994c) we can go beyond the "quarrel" be- 
tween traditional and non-traditional rchitecture sys- 
tems and still generate in an incremental way. This is 
due to the richness of the Generative Lexicon which 
allows for mechanisms to create dynamically on one 
hand the triggered concepts (by means of the inheri- 
tance structures) and on the other hand to make the 
syntactico-semantic information available in the lin- 
97 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
guistic environment of words (by means of the argu- 
ment, event, qualia structures; and the LCPs). In 
this sense we have shown that GLT can be seen as 
a promising cornerstone for generating the most ade- 
quate lexical items. 
References  
Benson, M. (1989) The Structure of the Collocational 
Dictionary. In International Journal of Lexicogra- 
phy. 
Bloksma, L., Heylen, D., Maxwell, K.G. (1993) Analy- 
sis of Lexical Functions. In D. Heylen (ed.) (1993). 
Bouillon, P., Viegas, E. (1994) A Semi-polymorphic 
Approach to the Interpretation of Adjectival Con- 
structions: A Cross-linguistic Perspective. In Eu- 
ralex 1994. 
Church, K.W., Hanks, P. (1989) Word Association 
Norms, Mutual Information and Lexicography. In 
A CL 1989, Vancouver. 
Carpenter, B. (1992) The Logic of Typed Feature 
Structures. Cambridge: CUP. 
Dubois, D., Pereita, H. (1993) Ontology for Concepts 
and Categories: is there any difference? A Few Em- 
pirical Data and Questions for an Ontology of Cat- 
egorial Knowledge. In Formal Ontology, Padova, 
March 17-19. 
I-Iausmann, F.J. (1979) Un dictionnaire des colloca- 
tions est-il possible ? In Travaux de Linguistique t 
de Littdratnre XVII, 1. 
Heid, U., Raab, S. (1989) Collocations in Multilingual 
Generation. In EACL 1989, Manchester. 
Heylen, D. (Ed.) (1993) Collocations and the Lex- 
icalisation of Semantic Information. In Colloca- 
tions, technical report ET-10/75, Taaltechnologie, 
Utrecht. 
Iordanskaja, L., Kittredge, R., Polgu~re, A. (1991) 
Lexical Selection and Paraphrase in a Meaning-text 
Generation Model. In C. L. Paris, W. Swartout and 
W. Mann (eds), NLG in A1 and Computational Lin- 
guistics. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Lakoff, G. (1970) Irregularities in Syntax. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. 
Marcus, M. (1987) Generation Systems hould Choose 
their Words. In Third TINLAP. 
McDonald, D.D. (1988) On the Place of Words in the 
Generation Process. In Proceedings of the 4th In- 
ternational Workshop on NLG. 
McKeown, K.R., Swartout, W.R. (1988) Language 
Generation and Explanation. In Lock, M. and 
Sabah, G. (Ed) Advances in NLG. NJ: Ablex. 
Mel'~uk, I. (1988) Paraphrase t lexique dans la 
th~orie Sens-Texte. In G. Bus, C. Fuchs (ed.) Lex- 
ique 6. 
Mel'~uk, I., Arbatchewsky-Jumarie, L., Elnitsky, L., 
Lessard, A. (1991) Dictionnaire ezplicatif et corn- 
binatoire du franfais contemporain. Montr6al : 
Presses de l'universit6 de MontrEal. 
Meteer, M. (1992) Expressibility and the Problem of 
Efficient Text Planning. Great Britain: Pinter Pub- 
lishers Ltd. 
Nogier, J.-F., Lock, M. (1992) Lexical Choice by 
Pattern-matching. In Knowledge Based Systems, 
5 (3). 
Pustejovsky, J., Anick, P. (1988) On the Semantic 
Interpretation of Nominals. In Coling 1988, vol.2: 
518-523. 
Pustejovsky, J. (1991) The Generative Lexicon. In 
Computational Linguistics, 17(4). 
Pustejovsky, J. (1993) Type Coercion and Lexical Se- 
lection. In J. Pustejovsky (ed.) Semantics and the 
Lexicon. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press. 
Pustejovsky, J. (1994a) Linguistic Constraints on 
Type Coercion. In P. St-Dizier and E. Viegas 
(Eds) Computational Lexical Semantics. Cam- 
bridge: CUP. 
Pustejovsky, J. (1994b) Semantic Typing and Degrees 
of Polymorphism. In C. Martin-Vide (Ed) Current 
Issues in Mathematical Linguistics. Elsevier North 
Holland Inc. 
Pustejovsky, J. (1994c) The Generative Lexicon. MIT 
Press. 
Ramos, M., Tutin, A., Lapalme, G. (1994) Lexical 
Functions of Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary 
for Lexicalization in Text Generation. In P. St- 
Dizier and E. Viegas (Ed) Computational Lexical 
Semantics. Cambridge, NY: CUP. 
Reiter, E. (1991) A New Model for Lexical Choice for 
Nouns. In Computational Intelligence, 7(~): Spe- 
cial Issue on NLG. 
Robin, J. (1990) Lexical Choice in NLG. Technical 
Report CUCS-040-90, Columbia University, New 
York. 
Sinclair, J. (1991) Corpus, Concordance, Collocations. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Smadja, F., McKeown, K. (1991) Using Collocations 
for Language Generation. In Computational Intel- 
ligence, 7(4): Special ssue on NLG. 
Smadja, F. (1993) Retrieving Collocations from Texts: 
Xtract. In Computational Linguistics, 19(1). 
Viegas, E. (1993) La lexicalisation clans sa relation 
avec la conceptualisation: probl~mes thgoriques. 
Doctorat Nouveau R~gime, Universit~ Toulouse le 
Mirail. 
Wanner, L., Bateman, J. (1990) Lexical Cooccurence 
Relations in Text Generation. In Proceedings of the 
12th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science 
Society, Cambridge, MA. 
Weinreich, U. (1964) Webster's Third: A Critique of 
its Semantics. In International Journal of Ameri- 
can Linguistics 30: 405-409. 
98 
