Content and Rhetorical Status Selection in Instructional Texts 
Leila Kosseim Guy Lapalme 
kosseim@iro.umontreal.ca lapalme@iro.umontreal.ca 
D4partement d'informatique et de recherche op4rationnelle 
Universitd e Montrdal 
PB 6128, Succ. Centre Ville 
Montrdal, Qudbec, Canada 
H3C 3J7 
Abstract  
This paper discusses an approach to planning the content 
of instructional texts. The research is based on a corpus 
study of 15 French procedural texts ranging from step--by- 
step device manuals to general artistic procedures. The 
approach taken starts from an AI task planner building a 
task representation, from which semantic arriers are se- 
lected. The most appropriate RST relations to communi- 
cate these carriers are then chosen according to heuristics 
developed uring the corpus analysis. 
1 Introduct ion 
A standard problem in text generation is to determine 
what to include in the text and how to structure it. The 
goal of this research is to study how the content of instruc- 
tional texts and their rhetorical structure can be selected 
automatically. The approach taken starts from a task 
representation developed by an AI planner, from which 
a set of semantic carriers, specifying the content of the 
text, is selected. Then the rhetorical relations that best 
communicate these semantic arriers are selected. The 
approach is based on a corpus analysis that determined: 
? What semantic carriers are found in instructional 
texts, where they can be found in the task repre- 
sentation and when they are included in the text. 
* What rhetorical relations are used to present he se- 
mantic carriers and when one is preferred over an- 
other. 
If these points are not dealt with, an instructional text 
generator may choose to say everything available in the 
task representation, and may communicate it using al- 
ways the same rhetorical strategy. For example, the task 
of using the one touch record (OTR) feature of a VCR can 
be represented as in figure 11 . From this task representa- 
tion, the following unacceptable t xt may be produced: 
To use the 0TR feature, set the speed selector to "SP", 
"SP" will light up; select channel 4; specify the 
recording time; emd press the TIMER button within 9 
seconds, the TIMER indicator w?11 light up. 
To set the speed selector to ?*SP", press the SP/EP 
button. The speed will change. 
To set channel 4, press the channel button. The channel 
will change. 
To specify the recording time, press the OTR button 3 
times. 
To press the OTR button 3 times, press it once, PM 
10:35; press it a second time, PM 11:05; press it a 
third time, PM 11:35. 
A more natural text would be~: 
The 0TR feature: 
Set the tape speed selector to "SP". "SP" will (I) 
light up. 
Select channel 4, by pressing the channel button. (2) 
Press the OTR button 3 times to specify the (3) 
recording time. 
When the button is pressed once, PM 10:35. (4) 
When i t  is pressed twice, PM 11:05. (5) 
When it is pressed 3 times, PM 11:35. (6) 
Press the TIMER button within 9 seconds. The (7) 
TIMER indicator will light up. 
Not all the knowledge of the task representation is in- 
troduced in the text. For example, many parent-child 
relations between operations are left unsaid. In addition, 
the same type of knowledge is not always presented by the 
same rhetorical relation. For example the parent-child re- 
lation of the operations in sentence (2) is expressed by an 
enab iement  relation rather than a purpose  as in sen- 
tence (3). 
The paper first reviews previous work in instructional 
text planning. The results of the corpus analysis leading 
l In  figure 1, operat ions are indicated on the top lines and post- 
condit ions are preceded by an "=./'. 
2The French version of this text was automat ica l ly  produced by 
the prototype implementat ion ,  see section 4. 
53 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994- 
set(speed_SP) 
on(SP_ l ight)  
press(SP/EPbutton) 
changed(speed) 
use(OTR) 
se lec t  (c lannel_4) spec i fy  (t ime) 
press  (CHANNEL-button) 
changed(channel)  
press(TIMER_button) 
on(TIMERl ight)  
p ress(OTR~utton,  3~imes)  
press(OTR~utton, I) 
PM 10:35 
press(OTR_.hutton, 2) press(OTR_button, 3) 
PM 11:05 ~ PM 11:35 
Figure 1: Task representation for using the OTR feature 
to the development of the planning approach are then dis- 
cussed. Finally, preliminary results of a prototype system 
are presented. 
2 Planning Instructional Texts 
The goal of an instructional text is to describe the actions 
to be performed to achieve a particular goal. For the 
reader to understand/perform the procedure correctly, 
the instructional text must communicate the plan of the 
procedure into the text. In AI, planning techniques have 
been developed to construct such plans automatically. It 
then becomes natural to consider an AI planner as a pre- 
liminary component to an instructional text generator. 
The output of an AI planner provides a fairly appropriate 
source for generating instructional texts, as only specific 
types of information are found in these texts, and most of 
them can be found or derived from a task representation. 
Another important characteristic of instructional texts 
is that their rhetorical structure is rather stereotyped and 
use a small set of relations \[12, 15\]. In addition, these 
relations correspond very well to those defined in Mann 
and Thompson's RST \[7\]. This makes RST an attractive 
tool for studying this genre. 
From these two remarks, the planning of instructional 
texts is often seen as a two-stage process \[8, 1\]: a task 
planning stage, where the plan of the procedure is devel- 
oped, followed by a text planning stage, where the content 
of the text is selected from the task representation 3, and 
the rhetorical status of this knowledge is selected. 
3A task representat ion provides most  knowledge found in in- 
struct ional  texts ,  but  a model  of the reader and a domain  knowledge 
base are also required. 
When a task representation is used as the source of 
text planning, the resulting text is very much dependent 
on the representation's structure. However, a task repre- 
sentation is not universal; several factors can influence its 
development. The lexical capacity of the language being 
used may influence the conceptual representation of the 
task. Also, independently of the language being used, the 
same task can be represented in various ways (whether 
with more or less detail, or with a different structure). 
However, whether we use one representation r another as 
the basis for generation, the goal of our research is to gen- 
erate a text similar to "natural" ones so that readers can 
interpret and possibly execute the procedure correctly. 
Even when human writers wl and w2 write "natural" in- 
structions for readers r l  and r2, they may base their writ- 
ing on different ask representations and may choose to 
transmit different information. When reading the texts, 
r l  and r2 may build different ask representations from 
one another and from wl and w2. But if both texts are 
adequate, the readers will interpret he prescribed task 
correctly. No single ideal task representation exists for 
a procedure and no single ideal text describing it exists. 
Our goal is not to construct and use the one task repre- 
sentation that allows the generation system to reproduce 
the source text word for word, but to produce "possibly 
natural" texts from a "possibly natural" task representa- 
tion. 
2.1 AI Planning 
An AI planner, or task planner, attempts to find a set of 
operations to achieve some task, or goal \[13\]. It tries to 
transform the current state of the world, where the goal 
54 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
is not satisfied to a final state where the goal is true. The 
task planner takes as input a library of operation schemas 
and selects and orders a subset of these by constructing 
some task representation. Typically, AI planners are hi- 
erarchical and develop non-linear plans. That is, they de- 
fine the plan by successive refinement, decomposing the 
current plan to a lower, more detailed level of abstraction 
until primitive operations (which do not require further 
refinement) are reached. The resulting structure is a hi- 
erarchy of plans. Non-linearity involves defining a partial 
order on the operations. 
In the context of instruction generation, operation 
schemas can be built, as in traditional AI planning, out of: 
(1) the operation ame (eg. use(0TR)), (2) its body: how 
the operation can be sub-divided into simpler operations 
(eg. set(speed_SP) A select(channel_4) A . . . ) ,  (3) 
its preconditions: states that need to be true in order 
to apply the operation (eg. ?n_vcr(cassette)); if the 
task planner cannot solve a precondition, the condition 
is passed on to the text planner to be included in the 
text and solved by the agent, (4) and its postcondi- 
tions: states that become true or false after the oper- 
ation is executed. Postconditions can be divided into: 
postconditions of success (if the operation is performed 
correctly, eg. on(timer.light)) and postconditions of 
failure (if the operation is not performed correctly, eg. 
blink (error_light)). 
Note that we consider operations to be events whose 
actor is the agent performing the procedure, and could 
occur now or in the near future. Events whose actor is 
the device being manipulated, some undefined actor, or 
which have occurred previously are considered states and 
may be represented as postconditions or preconditions. 
For example, the actor of tu rn_on( t imer~ight )  is not 
the agent of the procedure, but the device being manipu- 
lated. This is thus not represented as an operation in the 
schemas but as a postcondition state of an agent opera- 
tion. 
2.2 Previous Work in Planning Instruc- 
tions 
Previous work on planning the contents of instructional 
texts include Dale's EPICURE \[1\] and Mellish and Evans's 
system \[9\], which both start from the output of an AI 
task planner to select the text's content. However the 
first system seems only applicable to a particular domain; 
while the other seems to lack linguistic motivation. 
In \[1\], all primitive operations of the task representa- 
tion are included in the text as a sequence of actions. 
Furthermore, only these primitive operations are included 
in the text. In EPICURE's domain (cooking recipes), 90 
to 100% of the content are action sequences \[15\]. Since 
the other knowledge available in the task representation 
(non-primitive operations, parent-child relations, . . . )  are 
usually not presented as action sequences, the strategy 
seems appropriate in this domain. However, it cannot 
be applied directly in most other domains where the pro- 
portion of action sequences i lower. On the other hand, 
to explain a plan, \[9\] includes in the text all operations 
and hierarchical relations available in the task represen- 
tation. No result, condition, negative imperative \[3\], or 
other information found in naturally occurring texts are 
included. Moreover, the rhetorical strategies used do not 
seem linguistically motivated. 
Our efforts are aimed at developing heuristics guiding 
the selection of content and rhetorical status to produce 
"natural" instructions. We have emphasized two types 
of tasks. According to the classification of \[5\], these are: 
operator tasks, ie. procedures on a system or device to ac- 
complish a goal external to that system/device ( g. mow- 
ing the lawn); and maintenance/repair tasks, that is, spe- 
cific operations on a system/device ( g. repairing a tape 
recorder). 
3 The Corpus Analysis 
In order to generate "natural" texts, we first analyzed a 
corpus of 15 French instructional texts (.~ 13,300 words) 
from different writers, domains, and text types. 
Our view of instructional texts is rather larger than 
in other NLP research. For example, in \[15, 12, 2\] texts 
are restricted to execution-oriented instructions, where 
the reader is assumed to be the agent of the procedure. 
However, many texts that indicate how to perform a task 
are explanation-oriented and thus do not assume that 
the reader will immediately or even ever execute the pro- 
cedure. Our corpus thus ranges from step-by-step ro- 
cedures (also called procedural directives \[4\] and linear 
explanations \[5\]), like device manuals to explanations- 
oriented texts like arts and crafts books. 
We performed an RST analysis only at the bottom level 
of the textual structure, that is at the inter- and intra- 
clausal evels. As reported in Vander Linden \[15\] and RSs- 
ner and Stede \[12\], instructional texts use only a subset 
of RST relations. The most common are tempora l  se- 
quence,  c i rcumstance/cond i t ion  (c-condition4), re-  
sult  (volitional and non volitional), purpose ,  enable-  
ment  and other non-procedural relations (attributes of 
objects, motivation . . . ) .  
4A c-condition combines RST's relations of circumstance and 
condition. It is what \[15\] and \[12\] call "precondition", but we prefer 
to use this term in its AI planning definition. 
55 
7th International Generation Workshop * Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
3 .1  A Semant ic  Leve l  
With the idea of using an AI task planner, and later 
rhetorical relations, we first set out to see how the knowl- 
edge available from a task representation (call it task 
knowledge) could directly determine rhetorical relations. 
In most cases, this is successful. For example, opera- 
tion nodes in the task representation are mostly presented 
by action sequences, parent operation odes by purpose 
relations, postconditions by results . . .  However in many 
cases, the same type of task knowledge is communicated 
through different relations. 
For example, parent-child relations can be presented in 
the text by a purpose related to an action. In this case 
the relation is seen bottom-up and explains why the child 
operation should be performed, as in: 
(1) Revissez l'6crou-capuchon sur la lyre pour ne pas le per- 
dre .  
(Screw the screw-cap on the lamp shade holder so that 
you do not lose itfi) 
A parent-child relation can also be presented by an en- 
ablement related to an action. In that case, the relation 
is seen top-down and explains how the parent operation 
should be performed, as in: 
(2) R~gler la ceinture n la tirant par la languette: 
(Adjust the belt by pulling it by the flap.) 
Another example involves preconditions which can be pre- 
sented by a purpose relation or a c-condition, as in: 
(3) a. Pour vous aider, poussez fermement le flanc du pneu 
avec votre pied. 
(To help you, firmly press the side of the tire with 
your foot.) 
b. Si la victime est debout, placez-vous derriere lle. 
(I\] the victim is standing, place yourself behind him.) 
As shown from these examples, the task knowledge does 
not uniquely determine the rhetorical relation used. The 
opposite is also true. In both examples (1) and (3a), a 
purpose relation is used, but in (1), it indicates a hierar- 
chical relation and in (3a) it indicates a precondition on 
the "press" operation. 
In order to map the task knowledge to the appropriate 
rhetorical structure, we have introduced an intermediate 
semantic level. This level classifies task knowledge into 
semantic carriers according to functional criteria (the 
mandatory/optional nature of operations, the execution 
time, the influence of an operation on the interpretation 
of the procedure . . . ) .  Semantic arriers help determine 
what task knowledge is introduced in the text and what 
rhetorical relation should be used. 
For example, in (1), the parent-child relation carries a 
sense causality because it indicates that the "screwing" 
5 All Eng l i sh  t rans la t ions  are  ours .  
operation will cause the agent not to lose the screw-cap. 
The parent operation (not losing the screw-cap) does not 
influence how the child operation should be executed but 
rather justifies it. For this kind of semantic carrier, a 
purpose relation is most frequently used. In (2) however, 
the execution of the "pull" operation is influenced by the 
"adjust" goal; it carries a sense of guidance on how the 
execution should be performed. In this particular case, 
an enablement relation was selected. In (3a), the precon- 
dition indicates an option that the agent will probably se- 
lect, this explains why a purpose relation is used. Finally, 
in (3b), the precondition indicates a material condition; 
this semantic Carrier is mostly presented by a c-condition 
relation. 
3 .2  Some Resu l ts  
Figure 2 shows the correspondence between the task 
knowledge, the semantic arriers they can bring about, 
and the rhetorical relations used to present hem. These 
semantic arriers are by no means the only way to inter- 
pret the information communicated in instructional texts 
(see for example \[10, 3\]), and only account for procedural 
type information. They are based on our interpretation 
of our corpus. 
The heuristics to introduce certain semantic carriers 
rely heavily on the notion of basic-level operations intro- 
duced by Rosch \[11\] and Pollack \[10\]. Basic-level opera- 
tions are those operations that people seem to remember 
and are able to represent mentally most easily. In the 
texts, they turn out to be detailed enough to be descrip- 
tive, but general enough to be useful. In her work, \[11\] 
found considerable agreement among people on the kinds 
of units of events that are remembered. For example, 
when asked to recall events that occurred in the morning, 
subjects remembered operations like brushing their teeth, 
taking a shower, but no one mentioned smaller units like 
squeezing the toothpaste tube . . .  or larger units like "do- 
ing the morning chores". It was hypothesized then that 
people have a more accessible memory representation for 
basic-level operations, than for any other type of event. 
This hypothesis eems appropriate in instructional texts: 
basic-level operations are included in the text as the writ- 
ers have a memory representation for them and promote 
the reader's recall, for they can easily build a memory 
representation f the procedure. Then, depending on the 
level of knowledge of the reader, more or less detailed 
operations are given. Basic-level operations are a rather 
subjective notion and depend heavily on factors like the 
communicative goal, the discourse domain . . .  
Only the most common semantic arriers (making up 
more than 80% of the texts) are discussed here. These 
56 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
Task Knowledge 
\] I 
precondition 
parent-child ~ * 
relation 
I postconditi0ns * 
Semantic Carriers Rhetorical Relations 
l * sequential operation 
concurrent 
operation 
I eventual 
\[operation 
option 
* material 
condition 
guidance 
c-condition (1%) When 0 is done, 
- -E  action sequence (99%) Do O. 
action concurrency Doing 01, do 02. 
c-condition If you do O, 
I------r--" c-condition (3%) I\] you want to do O, 
I L  purpose (97%) To do O, 
~ action sequence (1%) Check that this is the case. 
__  purpose (3%) For this case, 
result (6%) \[If this is the case,\] that is also true. 
c-condition (90%) If this is the case, 
purpose (28%) To do O. 
V L._ enablement (72%) \[Do 02\] by doing 0~. 
caus ty |F  p r ,ose (35%) To do O, V----L result (65%) 0 will be done. 
Figure 2: Correspondence b tween the task knowledge, the semantic arriers and the rhetorical relations 
include sequential operations, material conditions, guid- 
ances and causalities% 
Sequent ia l  operat ions  indicate an operation whose 
execution is mandatory, immediate and not concurrent 
with another. This semantic arrier is the most frequent 
in all types of instructions. In our corpus, it counts 748 
occurrences and make up 80% (in step-by-step instruc- 
tions) to 30% (in explanations-oriented instructions) of 
the text. 
Sequential operations are found as operation ames in 
the task representation. According to our analysis, three 
types of operations hould be included in the text: 
? All basic-level operations; 
? All children operations of basic-level operation, that 
have different postconditions from their siblings, and 
whose postconditions will be included in the text as a 
causality (see below). 
? All children operations of basic-level operation that 
the reader does not know how to perform. In this case, a 
sub-procedure is introduced. 
Sequential operations are sometimes presented by C- 
6For easy reference, they are preceded by a * in figure 2. In the 
text, content selectlon heuristics are preceded by a ? and rhetorical 
seIectlon heuristics by a o. 
condition 7 (1% of the time), but almost always by a se- 
quence of action clauses (99%). 
o A c-condition is used if a result, a negative imperative 
\[3\] or an action sequence will follow the operation in the 
text, and the operation is durative or follows case 2 above 
(see sentences 4, 5 and 6 of the VCR text). 
o Otherwise, the operation is presented by a temporal 
sequence of actions. 
Mater ia l  Cond i t ions  are preconditions on the state 
of the environment that the task planner is not able to 
verify. 
? All such preconditions are included in the text to 
let the agent decide for himself whether the next line of 
operations hould be performed. 
Out of 158 material conditions of the corpus, only 1% 
are presented by an action sequence, 3% by a purpose, 
6% by a result and 90% by a c-condition. 
To determine the rhetorical status of material condi- 
tions we believe that: 
o As \[15\] found, material conditions that specify en- 
surative actions (that the agent can make sure are true 
or do something so that they become true) are presented 
by action sequences. For example, 
7What Vander Linden calls rhetoric demotion \[16\]. 
57 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
(4) Introduire la cassette (vdrifier que la languette de la 
viddocasette n'a pas dtg enlevge.) 
Insert the cassette (check that the tab of the video cassette 
has not been removed.) 
o Material conditions that pertain to the type of de- 
vice/system are presented as often by a purpose relation 
or by a c-condition. 
(5) Pour un commutateur ordinaire \[...\], touchez la vis de 
la borne de cuivre avec la pince du v~rificateur. 
For an ordinary switch \[...\], touch the screw of the cop- 
per terminal with the pliers of the checker. 
o Material conditions that are difficult to evaluate, are 
presented by a result; and an equivalent condition, easier 
to test, is given and presented by a c-condition; as in: 
(6) S'ils lies vis\] portent la marque "L", ils ont le filetage d 
gauche, et vous devez les d~visser \[... \] 
If they \[the screws\] have an "L" mark, they have a le\]t 
winding, and you must unscrew them \[... \] 
o In all other cases, material conditions are presented 
by a c-condition. 
(7) Si elle est endomagge, il faut remplacer la douiUe. 
I\] it is damaged, the socket must be replaced. 
Gu idances  indicate how or why an operation should 
be performed and, at the same time, influence or guide 
its execution. This information is found in the task repre- 
sentation in the hierarchical relation between operations. 
Previous work on deciding whether or not to include 
hierarchical relation prescribed the inclusion of all \[8\], or 
no relation \[1\]. According to our analysis, a guidance is 
generally introduced when: 
? The execution of a basic-level operation depends on 
the execution of its parent operation (eg. for a stopping 
condition, a method to follow . . .  ). 
(8) Vous devez les d@vissez en tournant dans le sens des aigu- 
illes d'une rnontre. 
You must unscrew them by turning clockwise. 
? A basic-level operation requires precisions on how to 
execute it (eg, the reader does not know all steps, hesitate 
between 2 methods . . . ) .  In that case, the most impor- 
tant and discriminating sub-operation(s) is given. For 
example, 
(9) Introduisez un crayon dans la conduite en provenance de 
la pompe ? essence afin dYviter tout gcoulement. 
Insert a pencil in the pipe from the gas pump in order to 
prevent any leakage. 
Of the 120 guidances in our corpus, 72% are presented 
by an enablement and 28% by a purpose. 
o A purpose relation is always used if more than one 
sub-operation is given; if there is only one, both an en- 
ablement and a purpose may be used. 
o If the sub-operation specifies the use of a particular 
instrument or a particular way of doing an operation, an 
enablement is generally used (see example (8)). 
o Otherwise, a purpose is generally used as in example 
(9). 
Causa l i t ies  specify what the execution of an operation 
causes to the current state of the world. That  is, what 
becomes true and what is no longer true in the world. 
Causalities are found in an operation's post-conditions 
and in its parent operation. Indeed, the effect of any 
well executed operation is the achievement of its goal (the 
parent operation) and its postcondition. 
? A causality is included in the text if the reader is 
not aware of the causal link between an operation and a 
postcondition or 
? does not understand why a basic-level operation 
should be executed. 
Causalities are always brought about by an agent oper- 
ation and can specify an operation from the device (some 
reaction) or from the agent. Of the 136 causalities of the 
corpus, 35% are presented by a purpose relation and 65% 
by a result. 
o Causalities pecifying a device's reaction are always 
communicated through a result relation, as in: 
(10) Presser "4", et le canal $ sera selectionnd ans les 2 sec- 
ondes. 
Press "4", and channel ~ will be selected within P seconds. 
Causalities pecifying an agent operation can be com- 
municated through a purpose or a result relation. In this 
case, the causality justifies why a series of operations that 
may seem strange should be performed. They are used to 
satisfy the reader's curiosity and, unlike guidances do not 
influence the performance of the operations. Compare, 
for example, sentence (8) above with: 
(11) Pour protdger les bornes contre la tension, nouez les ex- 
tr@mit@s @par@es du cordon. 
To protect the terminals against electric tension, tie the 
extremities of the wire away from each other. 
o If the causality specifies an operation that the agent 
wishes to perform, the causality is presented by a purpose. 
o If the causality indicates an operation that the agent 
does not know needs to be perform, the causality is pre- 
sented by a result relation. 
4 The  SPIN System 
The results of the corpus analysis have been implemented 
in the spin s prototype. SPIN is involved in all levels of 
text generation: strategic, tactical, and motor \[17\] levels. 
Generation is performed linearly with the emphasis put 
SSyst~me de Planification d'INstructions 
58 
7th International Generation Workshop ? Kennebunkport, Maine ? June 21-24, 1994 
on the strategic stage. SPIN builds a task representation 
from a top level goal and an initial description of the 
world using a hierarchical non-linear planning technique. 
The resulting hierarchy of plans is traversed breath-first 
by the text planner to select he semantic arriers. Then, 
the most appropriate local rhetorical relations are chosen. 
At the linguistic realization level, the actual grammatical 
form and position of the relations are selected based on 
the results of \[15\] adapted to French 9. 
Figure 3 shores an output of SPIN. It indicates how to 
use the one touch recording (OTR) feature of a VCR (its 
English translation was given in section 1). Let us sketch 
the planning of this text. 
From a library of operation schemas, SPIN develops 
the task representation of figure 1. Note that figure 1 
only includes the operation ames and the postconditions, 
whereas the actual plan representation includes the entire 
operation schemas. 
In this task, basic-level operations are considered to 
be: set  any speed, se lec t  any channel, and press  any 
button. 
The text planner initially selects the top-level goal as 
the title of the ttxt. Let us deal with postconditions first: 
from the heuristics of section 3.2, recall that causalities 
from postconditions are included if the reader does not 
expect hem. After consulting the model of the reader t?, 
SPIN rules out the postconditions changed(speed) and 
changed(channel)  already expected by the reader, and 
decides to include all other postconditions as causalities, 
using a result relation. 
Because set  (speed_SP) is a basic-level operation, SPIN 
selects it as a sequential operation. Because it does not 
satisfy the special case for using c-conditions, it is pre- 
sented by an action sequence (sentence 2). The reader 
knows how to perform the operation so its child opera- 
tion is not given, qSet (channel_4) is a basic-level op- 
eration, but the reader is assumed to know two meth- 
ods of executing it. A guidance with the sub-operation 
press (channe l .but ton)  is therefore included. Because 
the operation specifies a particular instrument to be used, 
SPIN chooses an enablement to communicate this guid- 
ance (sentence 3). Spec i fy ( t ime)  is not considered a
basic-level operation, but press(0TR_button, 3_times) 
is. The reader may wonder why this last operation should 
be done (according to his model, he does not know that 
this operation is done to specify the time), so a causal- 
9The positions of the rhetorical relations in both languages seem 
fairly similar, but the grammatical realization often differs. In ad- 
dition, because we consider explanation-oriented instructions, the 
variety of grammatical forms is larger. 
l?The model of the reader is a library of operation schemas rep- 
resenting the reader's knowledge. This library is allowed to be in- 
consistent with the task planner's and is corrected and updated 
dynamically as the text is produced. 
La touche OTR (1) 
R4glez le s41ecteur de v i tesse  de bande (2) 
sur ~(SP'' 
S~lectionnez le canal 4, en appuyant la (3) 
touche de canal. 
Appuyez sur la touche 0TR 3 fois pour (4) 
specifier l'heure d'enregistrement. 
Lorsque la touche est enfonc4e 1 fois, PM (5) 
10:35. 
Lorsqu'elle est enfonc~e 2 fois, PM 11:05. (6) 
Lorsqu'elle est enfonc~e 3 lois, PM 11:35. (7) 
Appuyez sur la touche TIMER dans un d~lai (8) 
de 9 secondes. 
Figure 3: SPIN output: the VCR text 
ity with spec i fy ( t ime)  is included in the text. The 
reader knows this parent operation should be performed, 
therefore the causality is presented by a purpose rela- 
tion (sentence 4). The 3 children of press  (0TR_bueton, 
3_times) are also included in the text as operation se- 
quences because they have different postconditions in- 
cluded in the text. For this reason, they are pre- 
sented by c-conditions in sentences 5, 6 and 7. Finally, 
p ress ( t imer_but ton)  is a basic-level operation, it is 
thus included as a sequential operation and communi- 
cated through an action sequence. 
SPIN puts an emphasis on the planning stage, thus 
many aspects of the linguistic realization are left uncon- 
sidered. However, to avoid generating heavy and unnatu- 
ral descriptions, SPIN can generate some anaphora (see for 
example the referring expression la touche of sentence 5
and the pronouns elle of sentences 6 and 7). This feature 
is especially useful in system/device-oriented instructions 
where the same objects are often used. This was done by 
implementing a subset of Tutin's study \[14, 6\]. 
5 Conc lus ion  
This research is aimed at planning instructional texts 
from the output of an AI planner. The approach is based 
on a corpus study of a wide range of operator and re- 
pair/maintenance domains. It is based on a two stage 
process: a task planning stage, and a text planning stage. 
Text planning is not performed constructively through 
RST schemas. Rather, from the task representation a set 
of semantic arriers are selected, then from these, appro- 
priate RST relations are selected. 
Several aspects of instructional texts have been left 
aside. Repetitions, for example, do not occur frequently 
59 
7th International Generation Workshop * Kennebunkport, Maine * June 21-24, 1994 
and so have not been fully considered. Although itera- 
tive operations in a task representation should be explicit 
on their stopping condition and their scope, pragmatic 
knowledge allows "natural texts" to be less specific. Con- 
sider, for example, instructions for using a shampoo: Wet 
hair, lather, rinse and repeat. 
The current area of research involves analyzing how the 
communicative goal of the instructional text influences 
the content selection heuristics. For the moment, we are 
specifically looking at texts with different degrees of exe- 
cution incentive. Texts designed for the immediate xecu- 
tion of the procedure seem to use different heuristics for 
introducing semantic arriers than explanation-oriented 
instructions. For example, only external causalities are 
included in step-by-step instructions; while both external 
and internal causalities are included in explanation in- 
struction texts. We presume that the execution incentive 
does not influence the choice of RST relations, although 
a full investigation should be performed. 
Acknowledgments 
Many thanks to all members of the SCRIPTUM research 
team, and especially to Richard Kittredge and Massimo 
Fasciano. This work was supported by a NSERC schol- " 
arship. 
References  
\[1\] R. Dale. Generating Referring Expressions: Con- 
structing Descriptions in a Domain of Objects and 
Processes. The MIT Press, 1992. 
\[2\] J. Delin, D. Scott, and T. Hartley. Knowledge, In- 
tention, Rhetoric: Levels of Variation in Multilingual 
Instructions. In O. Rambow, editor, Proceedings of 
the A CL Workshop on Intentionality and Structure 
in Discourse Relations, pages 7-10, Ohio State Uni- 
versity, June 1993. 
\[3\] B. Di Eugenio. Understanding Natural Language In- 
structions: A Computational Approach to Purpose 
Clauses. PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 
1993. 
\[4\] P. Dixon, J. Faries, and G. Gabrys. The Role of Ex- 
plicit Action Statements in Understanding and Using 
Written Directions. Journal of Memory and Lan- 
guage, 1988. 
\[5\] P. Konoske and J. Ellis. Cognitive Factors in Learn- 
ing and Retention of Procedural Tasks. In R. Dillon 
and J. Pellegrino, editors, Instruction: Theoretical 
and Applied Perspectives, chapter 3. Praeger, New 
York, 1991. 
\[6\] L. Kosseim, A. Tutin, R. Kittredge, and G. Lapalme. 
Generating Anaphora in Assembly Instruction Texts. 
In Proceedings of the Fourth European Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation, Pisa, April 1993. 
\[7\] W. Mann and S. Thompson. Rhetorical Structure 
Theory: towards a functional theory of text organi- 
zation. TEXT, 8(3):243-281, 988. 
\[8\] C. Mellish. Natural Language Generation from 
Plans. In M. Zock and G. Sabah, editors, Advances 
in Natural Language Generation, Communications in 
Artificial Intelligence Series, chapter 7. Pinter Pub- 
lishers, London, 1988. 
\[9\] C. Mellish and R. Evans. Natural Language Gen- 
eration From Plans. Computational Linguistics, 
15(4):233-249, 1989. 
\[10\] M. Pollack. Inferring Domain Plans in Question- 
Answering. PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 
1986. 
\[11\] E. Rosch. Principles of Categorization. In E. Rosch 
and B. Lloyd, editors, Cognition and Categorization, 
pages 27-48. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N J, 1978. 
\[12\] D. RSsner and M. Stede. Customizing RST for 
the Automatic Production of Technical Manuals. In 
R. Dale et al, editors, Aspects of Automated Natu- 
ral Language Generation, Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 199-214. Springler-Verlag, 1992. 
\[13\] E. D. Sacerdoti. A Structure for Plans and Behavior. 
Elsevier, New York, 1977. 
\[14\] A. Tutin. Lexical choice in context: generating pro- 
cedural texts. In Proceedings of COLING-92, pages 
763-769, Nantes, 1992. 
\[15\] K. Vander Linden. Speaking of Actions: Choosing 
Rhetorical Status and Grammatical From in Instruc- 
tional Text Generation. PhD thesis, University of 
Colorado, 1993. 
\[16\] K. Vander Linden, S. Cumming, and J. Martin. Us- 
ing System Networks to Build Rhetorical Structures. 
In R. Dale et al, editors, Aspects of Automated Natu- 
ral Language Generation, Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 183-198. Springler-Verlag, 1992. 
\[17\] Michael Zock. La g~n~ration i teractive de langage: 
comment visualiser le passage de l'id@e k la phrase. 
In J. Anis and J-L. Lebrave, editors, Texte et Ordina- 
tear, Les Mutations du Lire-t~crire, pages 201-220. 
\]~ditions de l'Espace Europ@en, 1990. 
60 
