Lexical Rules for Deverbal Adjectives 
Victor Raskin 1 and Sergei Nirenburg 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, NM 88003 
{raskin, sergei} @ crl. nmsu. edu 
Abstract. This work belongs to a family of research efforts, called microtheories and 
aimed at describing the static meaning of all lexical categories in several languages in the 
framework of the MikroKosmos project on computational semantics. The latter also in- 
volves other static microtheories describing world knowledge and syntax-semantics map- 
ping as well as dynamic microtheories connected with the actual process of text analysis. 
This paper deals with the microtheory of adjectival semantics in one specific aspect, 
namely, the optimization and facilitation of the lexical entries for deverbal adjectives with 
the help:of lexical rules deriving such entries from those of the corresponding verbs. De- 
verbal adjectives turn out to be the largest single subclass in the adjective l xical category. 
Unlike scalar and relative adjectives, which are anchored in property and object concepts, 
respectively, in the underlying ontology, deverbal adjectives are based on process con- 
cepts. While acquisition with lexical rules is necessary, universal and efficient for the class 
of deverbal adjectives, our research shows that, often in spite of the strong appearance to
the contrary, such acquisition isneither fully automatic nor cost-free. The work was based 
on the set of over 6,000 English and about 1,500 Spanish adjectives obtained from task- 
oriented corpora. The findings are largely language-independent, and only English exam- 
ples are Used throughout the paper. 
1. Introduction 
The general toPic of this paper is the information about adjectival meaning which should be includ- 
ed in a computational lexicon. Having addressed this general topic elsewhere (Raskin and Niren- 
burg 1995), we focus here on a more specific topic of the meaning of deverbal adjectives and, even 
more specifically, on the lexical rules used to derive the meanings of such adjectives from those of 
the corresponding verbs. 
An extensive literature review in Raskin and Nirenburg (1995: 3-20) has demonstrated a focus on 
a number of issues that the non-computational linguistics of adjectives has deemed important. 
These include adjective taxonomies, usually on the basis of more or less consistent external crite- 
ria, the dichotomy between predicating and non-predicating adjectives and the related ichotomy 
between qualitative and relative adjectives, the order of adjectives modifying the same noun, the 
degrees of comparison and scalability, and the substantivization f adjectives. 
We have shown also (Raskin and Nirenburg 1995: 24-27) that computational lexicography and 
computational semantics impose totally different parameters of relevance on these issues. We dis- 
covered that developing adjective semantics for an application modifies many popular views on 
the subject. It becomes clear, for instance, that 
? many adjectives do not modify semantically the nouns that they modify syntactically; 
? adjectival (attributive) meanings may be delivered by other parts of speech, and thus the se- 
1 Also of Natural Language Processing Laboratory, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907. 
89 
mantics of adjectives only partially reflects their possible syntactic distinctions; 
? the major distinction among adjectives i scalar vs. non-scalar; 
? the attributive/predicative distinction, dominating the current scholarship on the adjective, 
has virtually no semantic significance, thus essentially crushing any hope to derive mean- 
ing from deep syntactic analysis; 
? there is a significant gap in our knowledge about relations between truly relative adjectives 
(as well as nominal modifiers in English) and the nouns they modify; 
? the typology of scales for gradables emerges as the dominant issue in adjective semantics 
and lexicography. 
Most importantly for this paper, the crucial taxonomic riterion for each adjective is its anchoring 
in the underlying ontology. Whether such an anchor is a property, object, or process concept de- 
fines the adjective as truly scalar, relative (denominal), or deverbal, respectively. 
The existing literature on adjectives also shows a predictable scarcity of systematic semantic anal- 
yses or lexicographic descriptions of adjectives. The quantifier adjectives, being the closest natural 
language comes to formal ogic, have been privileged in this respect--see, for instance, Jackendoff 
(1983), McCawley (1988: 594-630), Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet (1990: 406-430), Frawley 
(1992: 464-480). The second luckiest category is adjectives of measure, especially spatial and, to 
a lesser degree, temporal, which are also seen as being more logically structured (see Bierwisch 
1967, 1989, Greimas 1966, Teller 1969, Zhurinskiy 1971, Dowty 1972, Siegel 1976:107-149 and 
1979, Spang-Hanssen 1990, Spejewski 1995, and others). 
Obviously, the semantic analysis of adjectives hares many problems with the semantic analysis 
of anything in natural language. One specific problem, noted by very few scholars, is what Marx 
(1983--see also Marx 1977 and Szalay and Deese 1978) refers to as the "plasticity" of adjectival 
meaning, namely that the same adjective can emphasize a different property of a noun in a different 
context. Lahav (1989), working loosely in the Keenan and Faltz (1985) paradigm, presents the 
same property as the non-compositionality of adjectives. If, he argues, red birds, red houses, and 
red books mean all different kinds of redness--and they do--how can one derive the meaning of an 
Adj N combination from the meaning of the adjective and the noun? In other words, each noun, he 
believes, influences the meaning of the adjective. Katz (1972: 752), analyzing the meaning of 
good, is virtually the only author to have come up with a specific, even if definitely not complete 
account of how this works. Certain classes of nouns, he asserts, offer specific properties for good 
to work on: 
"It\]he respects inwhich evaluations of things c,,an be made differ with differences in the other semantic 
features of the words that refer to those things.' (Artifact) permits evaluation ofuses; (Component ofa 
system) functions; (Role) duties; (OrnamentaUon) purposes; (Food) pleasurability and healthfulness; there 
are many others." 
This situation, in which semantic analyses and lexicographic descriptions of adjectives (and other 
categories) are rare, is bound to change rapidly. As computational semantics moves to large-scale 
systems erving non-toy domains, the need for large lexicons with entries of all lexical categories 
in them is becoming increasingly acute, and the attention of computational semanticists and lexi- 
cographers i turning more towards uch previously neglected or avoided categories as the adjec- 
tives. Recently, there have appeared some first indications of this attention--see, for instance, 
Smadja (1991), Beckwith et al (1991), Bouillon and Viegas (1994), Justeson and Katz (1991, 
1995), Pustejovsky (1995: 20-23). This research is a step in the same direction. 
90 
2. The Ontology-Based Approach to Adjectival Semantics and Lexicology 
In this section, we briefly review the basis of our approach to adjectival meaning and illustrate it
on three examples of adjectival lexicon entries, i.e., one each for the three major classes of adjec- 
tives. 
2.1 The Ontological Approach 
Our work on adjectives forms a microtheory used by the MikroKosmos emantic analyzer. The ar- 
chitecture of MikroKosmos is described in Onyshkevych and Nirenburg 1994 and Beale et al 
1995. The MikroKosmos project is a component ofa knowledge-based machine translation system 
(see Nirenburg et al 1992). The purpose and result of the MikroKosmos analysis process is a ren- 
dering of the source language text into an interlingua text. The interlingua l nguage is called the 
"text meaning representation" (TMR) language, and the TMR of a text is its representation in this 
particular type of interlingua. TMRs are realized in a frame-based language, where frame names 
typically refer to instances of ontological concepts and slots are usually filled with values of prop- 
erties of those concepts. An ontology is, thus, a necessary prerequisite for building a TMR lan- 
guage. 
"An ontology for NLP purposes i  a body of knowledge about he world (or a domain) that a) is a 
repository of primitive symbols used in meaning representation; b) organizes these symbols in a 
tangled subsumption hierarchy; and c) further interconnects these symbols using a rich system of 
semantic and discourse-pragmatic relations defined among the concepts" (Mahesh and Nirenburg 
1995: 1). The function of the ontology is to supply "world knowledge to lexical, syntactic, and se- 
mantic processes" (ibid). 
The lexicon in MikroKosmos "mediates between the TMR and ontology" (Onyshkevych and 
Nirenburg 1994: 2). Lexicon entries for most open-class lexical items represent word and phrase 
senses, which can be either directly mapped into ontological concepts or derived by locally (that 
is, in the lexicon entry itself) modifying constraints on property values of concepts used to specify 
the meaning of the given lexical item. In the following section, we briefly illustrate the structure 
of those parts of the lexicon entry in MikroKosmos which bear on the description of the three types 
of adjectival meaning, scalar, denominal, and deverbal. 
2.2 The Ontological Approach to the Meaning of Adjective Types 
2.2.1 Scalar Adjectives 
Our microtheory associates the meaning of a typical truly scalar adjective with a region on a scale 
which is defined as the range of an ontological property. The contribution that the adjective makes 
to the construction of a semantic dependency structure (TMR) typically consists of inserting its 
meaning (a property-value pair) as a slot in a frame representing the meaning of the noun which 
this adjective syntactically modifies. 
Thus, in big house, big will assign a high value as the filler of the property slot SIZE of the frame 
for the meaning of house (see also Raskin and Nirenburg 1996). (1) is a partial lexical entry for big, 
with just two of the 13 lexical zones represented: 
(1) (big 
(big-Adj ~CAT adj) 
91 
(SYN-STRUC 
(1 ((root Svarl) 
(cat n) 
(mods ((root $var0))))) 
(2 ((root $var0) 
(cat adj) 
(subj ((root $varl) 
(cat n)))))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
((1 2) (size-attribute 
(domain (value ^ $varl) 
(sem physical-object)) 
(range (value (> 0.75)) 
(relaxable-to (value (> 0.6)))))))))) 
SIZE is an ontological concept of  the SCALAR-PHYSICAL-OBJECT-A'FrRIBUTE-PROPERTY type, with 
the term 'scalar' used here, as it is customari ly, primari ly in the sense of 'gradable.'  Big  is, of 
course, a typical gradable adjective, and as such, has a numerical  scale associated with it the mi- 
crotheory. Each numerical scale can be measured in actual measuring units, such as linear-size in 
feet, yards, or mil l imeters, or t ime in seconds. But often natural anguage xpressions do not refer 
to absolute magnitudes but rather to abstract relative ones, as in the case of b ig .  We assume a 0 to 
1 numerical range for such abstract scales. For abstract references to size, the fillers in Engl ish can 
be: 
(2) 
0y  y 1 
Big  will, then, get something like a '> 0.75' value on the SIZE scale (1). These values are a crucial 
part of  the lexical mapping (LEX-MAP) included in the semantics (SEM-STRUC) "zone" of  a scalar- 
adjective lexical entry. 2. 
Equally crucial is the syntactic-semantic mapping between the syntactic-structure (SYN-STRUC) 
and SEM-STRUC zones with the help of special variables. In the former, there are two subcategori- 
zation patterns, marked 1 and 2, l isted in SYN-STRUC of (1). The former pattern corresponds to the 
attributive use of  the adjective: the noun it modif ies is assigned the variable $var l ,  and the adjec- 
tive itself the variable $var0 in the modif ier  position. The latter pattern presents the noun, bound 
to $varl ,  in the subject posit ion and the adjective in the predicative position. In the SEM-STRUC 
zone, instead of variables which are bound to syntactic elements, the meanings of  the elements re- 
2 Similar values are assigned to any scale based on a property concept. It should be noted, however, that nu- 
merical values like these correspond tothe feature of gradability, which extends beyond scalarity: all scalar 
adjectives are gradable but not all gradable adjectives are true scalars. The two features are typically con- 
fused in the literature. This is why we distinguish ere between true scalars, i.e., those adjectives whose 
meanings are based on a scale that is a property concept in the ontology, and all the other adjectives which 
are gradable and may be also loosely referred to as "scalars." Thus, many denominal nd deverbal adjectives, 
in fact, most adjectives, can form a comparative or superlative degree form with the help of more __  or 
most  . . . .  respectively, e.g., more medica l  (3ii), more aeronaut ica l  (4), more employable  (6), more abusive 
(9-10). All of these adjectives are, therefore, gradable. Now, none of them is anchored in a scale-type proper- 
ty concept, however, which makes them all, technically, non-scalars but, in more practical and customary 
terms, non-true scalars. 
92 
ferred to by these variables (and marked by a caret, '^') are used. That is, ^ $varl reads as "the 
meaning of the element to which the variable $varl is bound." Among the constraints listed in the 
SEM-STRUC zone of an entry, are selectional restrictions (the noun must be a physical object) and 
relaxation information, which is used for treatment of unexpected ("ill-formed") input during pro- 
cessing. 
Thus, an entry like (1) should be read as follows: 
? first, the entry is the specification of a single sense, while the superentry is the set of such en- 
tries; 
? the second line assigns a sense number to the entry; 
? next, the adjective is assigned to its lexical category; 
? the first subcategorization pattern in the SYN-STRUC zone describes the Adj-N construction; 
the second subcategorization pattern describes the N-Copula-Adj construction; 
? the LEX-MAP part of the SEM-STRUC zone defines the lexical semantics of the adjective by as- 
signing it to the class of SIZE adjectives, that is, anchoring it in the ontological property- 
type concept SEE and stating that it is applicable to physical objects and that its meaning is 
a high-value range on the SIZE scale/property. 
In the case of continuous scales, like SIZE, the acquisition of all the adjectives served by this scale 
is greatly facilitated and expedited after the first one of them gets a lexical entry: each new adjec- 
tive needs only an appropriate range assigned to it, and the rest of the information in the semantic 
zone of the entry, as indeed in all the other zones as well, remains the same. We will recall this 
methodological circumstance shortly, in Section 3. 
2.2.2 Denominai Adjectives 
The most general case of a denominal adjective-entry and its connection to that of the corre- 
sponding noun is demonstrated in (3): 
(3) (i) (medicine 
(medicine-N1) 
(CAT n) 
(SYN-STRUC 
(root Svar0) 
(cat n))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
medicine)))) 
(ii) (medical 
(medical-Adj) 
(CAT adj) 
(SYN-STRUC 
(1 ((root $varl) 
(cat n) 
(mods ((root $var0))))) 
(2 ((root $var0) 
(cat adj) 
(subj ((root $varl) 
(cat n)))))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
(^$varl 
(pertain-to medicine)))))) 
The formula of transition from the noun entry to that of the adjective is simple and transparent, 
and it remains constant for this type of adjective. In Raskin and Nirenburg (1995: 39-41), we dis- 
cuss the desirability, feasibility, and usefulness of replacing the catch-all "pertain-to" dependency 
93 
with a more specific and informative one, and while we demonstrate s veral of those, we argue for 
staying at this generic level of granularity in a significant number of cases. 
Denominal adjectives are relative, and, as such, are expected to be non-scalar and non-predicating. 
A true relative adjective cannot indeed be used predicatively and or comparatively, but, practically, 
it is hard to come up with an example which is guaranteed against that. After all, (4i-ii) are not re- 
ally ill-formed, and it is hard to imagine a more truly-relative adjective than aeronautical 'related 
to aeronautics.' 
(4) (i) 
(ii) 
His approach to the problem was aeronautical. 
His approach to the problem was much more aeronautical than mine. 
Clearly, a productive semantic process, a shift, takes place here, probably along the lines of (5), 
and, therefore, a dynamic rule exists which creates adjective ntries for these predicating, pseudo- 
scalar, pseudo-qualitative senses of the seemingly perfectly relative adjectives. Their one telling 
difference from the truly qualitative, predicating, scalar adjectives is that the relative adjectives 
cannot make the qualitative shift in the attributive position. 
(5) Pertaining to \[noun meaning\] --->Pertaining more to \[noun meaning\] 
The difficulty of finding a relative adjective which would be absolutely resistant to a predicative 
shift of meaning is similar to the difficulties Katz (1972: 753) had, looking for a noun which could 
never be used with good. 
2.2.3 Deverbal Adjectives: First Glimpse 
A large class of adjectives whose meanings are derived from those of verbs also straddle the scalar 
/ non-scalar divide. The event-related scalars (actually, gradables--see fn. 2) do not really differ 
from true scalars in terms of their gradability (6); the event-related non-scalars can acquire grad- 
ability at the cost of a meaning shift or marginal acceptability (7). 
(6) 
(7) 
(i) Jake is employable 
(ii) Jake is very employable 
(iii) Jake is more employable than Bob 
(iv) Jake is most employable of all 
(v) Bob is barely employable 
(i) ?Jake's initiative was abortive 
(ii) ?Jake's initiative was very abortive 
(iii) ?Jake's initiative was more abortive than Bob's 
(iv) ?Jake's initiative was most abortive of all 
(v) ?Bob's initiative was barely abortive 
Examples (8-10) illustrate a typical transition from the lexical entry of a verb to those of the 
deverbal adjectives. Both the verb entry and the adjective ntries are much more complex than 
those for nouns and denominal entries. 
(8) (abuse (abuse-V1 
94 
(9) 
(10) 
(abusive 
(CAT V) 
(SYN-STRUC 
((root $varO) 
(cat v) 
(subj ((root $varl) 
(cat n)) 
(obj ((root $var2) 
(cat n)))))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
(communicative-event 
(agent (value ^ $varl) 
(sere human)) 
(benef (value ^$var2) 
(sem human)) 
(theme (value refseml)) 
(attitudel 
(type evaluative) 
(attitude-value (value (< 0.25))) 
(scope refseml) 
(attributed-to (OR (^$var2 speaker)))) 
(attitude2 
(type evaluative) 
(attitude-value (value (< 0.25))) 
(scope ^$var2) 
(attributed-to ^ $varl)))))) 
(abusive-Adj 1E 
(CAT adj) 
(SYN-STRUC 
(1 ((root $varl) 
(cat n) 
(mods ((root $var0))))) 
(2 ((root $var0), 
(cat adj) 
(subj ((root $var 1) 
(cat n)))))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
(A$varl 
(instance-of (sem communicative-event)) 
(agent (value refseml) 
(sem human)) 
(benef (value refsem2) 
(sem human)) 
(theme (value refsem3))) 
(attitudel 
(type evaluative) 
(attitude-value (value (< 0.25))) 
(scop.e refsem3) 
(attributed-to (OR (refsem2 speaker)))) 
(attitude2 
(type evaluative) 
(attitude-value (value (< 0.25))) 
(scope refsem2) 
(atmbuted-to refseml)))))) 
(abusive 
(abusive-Adj 1A 
(CAT adj) 
(SYN-STRUC 
(1 ((root $varl) 
(cat n) 
(mods ((root $varO))))) 
(2 ((root $varO) 
(cat adj) 
(subj ((root $varl) 
(cat n)))))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
(communicative-event 
(agent (value ^ $varl) 
95 
(sem human)) 
(benef (value refseml) 
(sem human)) 
(theme (value refsem2))) 
(attitudel 
(type evaluative) 
(attitude-value (value (< 0.25))) 
(scope refsem3) 
(attributed-to (OR (refsem 1 speaker)))) 
(attitude2 
(type evaluative) 
(attitude-value (value (< 0.25))) 
(scope refseml) 
(attributed-to ^ $varl)))))) 
This sense of the verb, "insult verbally," is anchored in the process concept COMMUNICATIVE- 
EVENT, modified by two evaluative attitudes, involving two unmapped (i.e., internal for the zone) 
variables, refseml and refsem2. Attitudel means that the beneficiary or. more appropriately, the 
victim, of the process, i.e., the abused person and/or the speaker evaluate(s) the theme of the abuse, 
i.e., the contents of what is said, as bad; attitude2 means that the agent of abuse-V1 thinks of the 
beneficiary pretty poorly. 
To derive the semantics zone of an adjectival entry from that of the corresponding verbal entry, 
one must first identify the case, or thematic role (such as agent, theme, beneficiary, etc.) filled by 
the noun modified by the adjective in question. What is abusive is either the event (E) itself, as in 
abusive speech or abusive behavior, or the agent (A) of the event, as in abusive man or abusive 
neighbor. AbusivelE (9) is then the eventive sense of the adjective formed from abuse-V1 (8), and 
abusive lA (10) is the agentive sense of the adjective in the same sense of abuse. There may, in fact, 
be at least 4 more senses, and entries, for the adjective, but we will come back to them shortly, in 
Section 4.1. 
3. Lexical Rules 
In this section, we introduce our notion of lexical rules (LRs), place their origin in the descriptive 
methodology and heuristics of large-scale l xical acquisition, and establish some usability param- 
eters for them. 
The "transition formulae" from a noun lexical entry (3i) to that of a denominal adjective (3ii) or 
from a verb lexical entry (8) to those of deverbal adjectives (9-10) are examples of LRs in which 
we are interested here. Each LR takes a ready entry (El) and creates another entry (E2) out of it 
automatically: 
(11) LR (El) = E 2 
Typically, each E 1 is produced "manually," that is, by a qualified human on the basis of all the 
available heuristics for the lexical acquisition process (see Raskin andNirenburg 1995: 41-57). 
These include methods of reducing unnecessary polysemy, gauging the optimal grain size, and de- 
termining the meaning, not the least of which is selecting the ontological concept in which the entry 
is anchored. These methods are, of course, captured in an array of semi-automatic ools of onto- 
logical and lexical acquisition developed for the MikroKosmos project (see, for instance, Mahesh 
1996 and Viegas and Raskin 1996). 
These tools stemmed from a pilot project, in which templates for types of lexical entries were de- 
96 
veloped truly manually and rapidly propagated on the basis of such obvious paradigmatic relations 
as synonymy and partial synonymy, antonymy, and hyper-/hyponymy, and much less obvious re- 
lations of partial overlap, such as exemplified above in connection with the lexical entry for big (1) 
and its easy adaptation toall the other SIZE adjectives by modifying the numerical value on the SIZE 
range (2), if necessary. The corpus of 6,000 English adjectives (an intersection of LDOCE and a 
corpus of 1987-99 Wall Street Journal articles) yielded some 250 S/ZE adjectives, all of them prop- 
agated from the same template that underlies (1). The least rivial relationship to establish involved 
constrains on the modified noun, thus recognizing an adjective like well-endowed ascharacterizing 
the size of a certain part of human male anatomy, a different part of human female anatomy, or the 
amount of money available to an institution. 
The discovery and use of such relationships and rapid propagation methods based on them lay the 
foundation for LRs. In fact, each such relationship and related method is a LR. Because we are en- 
gaged in massive lexical acquisition, we are obviously interested in LRs, which are: 
? easily discoverable; 
? massively productive; 
? exception-free. 
Perhaps the most easily discoverable LRs involve E l/E2 pairs which are morphologically related, 
especially if their share the roots. Some of these rules are transcategorial, i.e., E 1 and E2 belong to 
different lexical categories. Obviously, the denominal adjective LR and the deverbal adjective LR 
(12i-ii, respectively), exemplified in (3) and (8-10), are precisely such LRs. 
(12) (i) 
ii) 
LRNA (N entry) = Adj entry 
LRvA (V entry) = Adj entry 
The additional attraction for using (12i-ii) in massive acquisition is the facilitation of the least riv- 
ial element of lexical semantic heuristics, namely, the discovery of the ontological concept on 
which the lexical entry should be based. While a relatively small class of true scalars is more or 
less easily associated with certain property concepts, there are many more process and object con- 
cepts, and it is much easier to relate the meaning of a verb or a noun to one of those. Besides, it is 
precisely the denominal and deverbal adjectives which are very hard to relate to a property concept 
directly, so the LRs come in quite handy. 
Several of the LRs discovered manually in the pilot project urned out to be "large," in the sense 
of their massive productiveness (see, for instance, Viegas et al 1996), such as the comparative- 
degree LR, applicable to every one of the 4,000-plus gradable adjectives. Given the paucity of rel- 
ative adjectives:in English (because of the adjectival use of nouns), the denominal adjective LR 
(12i) produces around 300 entries in our English corpus. The deverbal adjective LR falls in be- 
tween, with an output of almost 1,000 entries. 
We have foundlvirtually no LR to be exception-free, and that reduces, of course, the degree to 
which a large LR can be used fully automatically, thus raising the cost of their application. 
4. Deverbal Adjectives: A Full(er) View 
In this section, we offer a bird's eye view of large-scale acquisition of deverbal adjectives with the 
help of LRvA, both in the general, common case, with its non-trivial complications, deviations, and 
exceptions, and in the particular case of the single largest and seemingly most regular subclass of 
97 
deverbal adjectives, namely, those ending in -able/-ible. The review is conducted from the perspec- 
tive of highly desirable full automation vs. the reality and unavoidability of exceptions requiring 
manual treatment. 
4.1 LRvA: Common Cases and Complications 
The common case of deverbal adjective acquisition includes most deverbal adjectives, and it is dis- 
cussed first. The most statistically and conceptually significant complications, deviations, and ex- 
ceptions from the common case are briefly sketched next. 
4.1.1 Common Case 
The 950 or so deverbal adjectives in our English corpus have received their entries as a result of 
the application of the deverbal adjective LR (12ii). The LR exists in at least these 6 forms, corre- 
sponding to the event or its semantic ases/thematic roles: 
? event-itself (E), e.g., abusive in (9): abusive behavior; 
? agent-of-event (A), e.g., abusive in (10): abusive husband; 
? beneficiary-of-event (B), e.g.,free in free bird; 
? theme-of-event (T), e.g., automatic in automatic elevator; 
? instrument-of-event (I), e.g., poisonous in poisonous food; 
? location-of-event (L), e.g., international in international company. 
As exemplified in (9-10), each case-related sub-LR operates in a well-defined way, placing ^ $varl 
in the SEM-STRUC zone in the value slot of the appropriate case of the event frame. Similarly, LR E, 
the event-itself sub-LR places ^ $varl in the event position. Obviously, then: 
(13) (i) 
(ii) 
LR E (abuse-V1) = abusive-lE (9) 
LR A (abuse-V1) = abusive-lA (10) 
Abuse has two more senses, abuse-V2 "violate a law or a privilege" and abuse-V3 "assault physi- 
cally." Abusive can inherit all of those senses, both in the eventive and agentive varieties, thus add- 
ing 4 more senses to its superentry. Abusive is indeed a pretty typical and "easy" example of LRvA. 
Even so, there are several aspects of its application which require human judgment. 
4.1.2 Selective Semantic Cases 
The first obvious complication is that not all of its semantic ases of a verb are usable for the LR- 
-in fact, only one of the three semantic ases of abuse, namely, agent is but beneficiary and theme 
are not. This throws the first monkey's wrench into making the LR fully automatic. Here, as in 
many similar cases in side and outside of this LR, we face a dilemma. We can either try and dis- 
cover a rule which marks some semantic ases as participating in the LR and others as not partic- 
ipating in it. Such a principle is not immediately clear and may: 
? not exist at all; 
? be very hard to research; 
? be cumbersome and involve a complicated procedure; 
? be exception-ridden, thus coming with a possibly lengthy list or several different lists; 
? be not machine-tractable. 
The other alternative is to check each verb manually, i.e., by a qualified human. We will see that 
98 
there are other factors which push this latter decision forward. 
4.1.3 Selective Meanings in Polysemous Verbs 
It is interesting to note that the sense distinctions in abusive seem to be less significant than in 
abuse. Typical of many cases of polysemy, this may be an indication that the distinctions in the 
dictionaries may be disposable (see the Spanish verb dejar reduced from 52 dictionary meanings 
to 7 in Nirenburg et al 1995). Perhaps less so in the case of abuse than in the case of abandon di- 
rectly below, it is reasonable to suggest that, in many cases of dictionary polysemy, it is the single 
sense of the verb modified by different ypes of nouns that can fill its case slots. Such cases are 
candidates for reducing polysemy as part of the heuristics procedures mentioned above (see also 
Raskin and Nirenburg 1995: 41-45). 
A human must decide whether the adjective inherits all the senses of a polysemous verb because it
is not always the case that it does--unlike abusive. Thus, impregnable has only the figurative sense 
of impregnate, Out of the 5 senses of abandon: 
? abandon-V1: "stop trying" (aspectual); 
? abandon-V2: "leave somebody or something at location"; 
? abandon, V3: "withdraw support"; 
? abandon-V4: "give up claim"; 
? abandon-V5: "yield to emotion"-- 
abandoned has 6 senses corresponding tojust three of the senses (some examples below may have 
other meanings along with the one exemplified): 
I 
? abandoned-2B, e.g., abandoned friend; 
? abandoned-2T, e.g., abandonedparcel; 
? abandoned-3B, e.g., abandonedprotdg~; 
? abandoned-3T, e.g., abandonedproject; 
? abandoned-4B, e.g., abandoned child; 
? abandoned-4T, e.g., abandonedproperty-- 
and 1, possibly no longer existing sense corresponding toanother sense of the verb: 
? abandoned-5T, e.g., John was abandoned to his grief (theme is used here in the experiencer 
mode). 
4.1.4 Adjectives and Participles 
Abandoned can, of course, be a participle as well, but we have discovered no reason whatsoever to
treat participles differently from deverbal adjectives. Surely, participles may have syntactic depen- 
dents and be used postpositively in English--more so than adjectives, but this is easily accounted 
for in the appropriate patterns (not demonstrated) in the adjective SYN-STRUC zone. An adjective, 
just as a participle, is a device to raise a proposition into a higher one. In fact, we suggest that all 
clearly participial adjectives must be treated exactly as we are proposing here, that is, with the help 
of LRvA: the only alternative isunfolding them into full-fledged clauses, and this is something MT 
should, and usually can, avoid dealing with--on the basis of the practical effability principle (Niren- 
burg and Raskin 1995: 45-47). That the difference between participles and adjectives may be a 
grammatical rtifact--or that, at least, it is of no significance for computational semantics--can be
indirectly but rather convincingly supported by the case of Russian, where the grammarians have 
been trying to prop up the distinction by insisting on the doubling of the spelling of n in the suffix 
of the past participle but not of the related adjective, as in ranennyy v ruku boetz "fighter wounded 
99 
in the arm" and ranenyy boetz "wounded fighter": the speakers reject his distinction both in pro- 
nunciation, where no consonant doubling is detectable, and in spelling, where the two forms are 
universally confused. 
4.1.5 Accidental Gaps 
Cases like impregnable above raise another significant issue. The treatment of negation in deverbal 
adjectives i not very difficult: the negative quantifier can, in most cases, be simply added to the 
non-negative adjective, and this applies to all of the negative prefices, such as un-, in- (ira-, etc.), 
dis-. But impregnable, like quite a few other negative deverbal adjectives, does not have a non-neg- 
ative counterpart, which looks like an accidental gap. In fact, the non-existence of a deverbal ad- 
jective, positive or negative, from the physical meaning of impregnate "make pregnant" is also an 
accidental gap. And, of course, a further complication is that im- in the verb is not negative while 
in the adjective it is: this is, apparently, the reason for the non-existence of the positive adjective, 
but this reason is itself an accidental gap. 
Gaps of this kind abound throughout the corpus. Why, for instance, there is perishable but not rot- 
table. As we will see below, the former is a somewhat rare bird among the deverbal adjectives end- 
ing in -ble, but, on the face of it, there is no difference between food products rotting and food 
products perishing--in fact, the former sounds more natural than the latter. Nevertheless, rottable 
sounds less acceptable than perishable. 
4.1.6 Suppletivism 
Many deverbal adjectives in the corpus derive their lexical entries from verbs which are not mor- 
phologically related to them (14). The LR, however, works with the same ease as in typical, mor- 
phologically derivative cases. An even stronger case of suppletivism involves processes which do 
not have single-word verbs denoting them. Nevertheless, it often makes ense--and this is a human 
judgment--to construct such verbs out of the appropriate ontological concept with necessary con- 
straints, because this is still the easiest way to construct lexical entries for some adjectives (15). 
Obviously, this kind of supersuppletivism would be impossible and arbitrary if implemented out- 
side a justified situated ontology. 
(14) 
(15) 
(i) ablaze < burn 
(ii) audible < hear 
(iii) awful-2 < fear 
(i) affectionate < show-affection 
(ii) possible < can-happen 
(iii) brainy < show-intelligence 
4.1.7 Syncretism 
Related to suppletivism, we discover quite a few deverbal adjectives "shared" by several verbs on 
a synonymous sense. This, abandoned-2 is a deverbal of both abandon-V2 (see Section 4.1.3 
above) and leave in the same sense of "leave somebody or something at location" because the lat- 
ter's "own" deverbal, eft, is not comfortable in adjectival use, especially attributively: 
(16) (i) 
(ii) 
I abandoned a friend in Hope, AR--I have an abandoned friend in Hope, AR 
I left a friend in Russell, KS--*I have a left friend in Russell, KS 
!oo 
4.2 Adjectives Ending in .ble 
A large subclass of deverbal adjectives are adjectives that end in able/ible (cf. Kjellmer 1986 and 
also Hall 1877, Jespersen 1942, Marchand 1960, Abraham 1970, Meus 1975, for a discussion of 
such adjectives in English, even though much of the discussion sheds little light on the semantic 
and lexicographic ssues in hand). Just about all of them mean 'something than can be \[verb\]-ed': 
thus, readable means 'something that can be read.' In other words, a typical -able entry is derived 
from the lexical entry of the appropriate verb, with the positive potential attitude added, and in ei- 
ther the beneficiary or theme role, depending on the animateness/inanimateness of $varl, respec- 
tively (17i-ii). 
(17) (i) 
(ii) 
(replaceable (replaceable-Adj 1B 
(CAT adj) 
(SYN-STRUC 
(1 ((root $varl) 
(eat n) 
(mods ((root $var0))))) 
(2 ((root Svar0) 
(cat adj) 
(subj ((root $varl) 
(cat n)))))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
(replace 
(benef (value ^$varl)) 
(m?dalit}t e 
( tvYa~uee 1.0) potential) 
(scop.e replace) 
(attributed-to *speaker*)))))) 
(readable (readable-Adj 1T
(CAT adj) 
(SYN-STRUC 
(1 ((root $varl) 
(cat n) 
(mods ((root $var0))))) 
(2 ((root $var0) 
(cat adj) 
(subj ((root $varl) 
(cat n)))))) 
(SEM-STRUC 
(LEX-MAP 
(read 
(modality(theme (value ^$varl)) 
(type ~.od~ntial ) 
(value 
(scope read) 
(attributed-to *speaker*)))))) 
The modality in the entries above corresponds, of course, to 'can' in the informal formula above. 
On the surface of it, these adjectives seem to be the best candidates for a fully automatic LR, espe- 
cially if the beneficiary/theme distinction can be taken care of on the basis of the animateness or
inanimateness of the modified--and this can be done. The problem is, however, that the beneficia- 
ry/theme combination of semantic ases for these deverbal adjectives, while accounting for a huge 
majority of such adjectives in the corpus (close to 270 out of the 300 or so), is only one of the 17 
possible semantic-case combinations: 
(18) (i) A able-2 < be-able 
101 
(ii) A E culpable < do-bad 
(iii) E disreputable <feel-shame 
(iv) T E comprehensible < understand-1 
(v) can+A perishable < perish-2 
(vi) can+A can+E audible < hear 
(vii) can+B acceptable-2 < accept-1 
(viii) can+B can+T definable < define-l-3 
(ix) can+B can+T can+A adjustable < adjust-l-2 
(x) can+L livable < live-1 
(xi) can+T actionable < sue 
(xii) not+A incapable-2 < be-able 
(xiii) not+can+A inviable < live-1 
(xiv) not+can+B unacceptable-2 < accept-1 
(xv) not+can+B not+can+T undefinable < define-l-3 
(xvi) not+can+L uninhabitable < live-1 
(xvii) not+can+T impassable < pass-l-4 
Stripped of 'can' and 'not,' there are still 9 different types, and because 'can' and 'not' do not "ap- 
ply" universally, their presence or absence are not trivial. Except for types (viii) and (xv), most of 
the types have few examples in the corpus, and perishable is alone in its type (v). What it means, 
again, is that human judgment is necessary in deciding which, if any, case form of LRvA to apply 
to each verb. 
5. Conclusion 
In this paper, we have: 
? introduced an ontological semantic approach to the lexical semantics of adjectives; 
? described and exemplified two relevant zones from lexical entries of adjectives; 
? demonstrated three major classes of adjectives, true scalars, denominals and deverbals; 
? explained our notion of lexical rules and their importance to acquisition; 
? discussed the lexical entries for deverbal adjectives and the role lexical rules play in their ac- 
quisition; 
? focussed on the issue of full automation of lexical rules in large-scale acquisition; 
? argued for a significant place for human judgment in the process. 
We believe, therefore, that LRs are worth discovering and activating only if they are clearly mass- 
productive, such as LRvA, which is central to this paper. Otherwise, the human cost of manual 
checking every verb entry before applying the rule to it would render each adjective ntry obtained 
with the help of the LR more--or at least no less--expensive than if it were produced manually 
"from scratch." 
Another important trade-off is between the cost of discovery and the productivity of the rule. It is 
pleasant and challengeable for a linguist o think that each pragmatic relation is worth discovering 
and activating in lexical acquisition. It is equally interesting to attempt to discover a rule for each 
and every exception and complication mentioned in Section 4. The Young-Grammarian pproach 
to language was that every single fact had a rule attached to it. This is probably true but not prac- 
tical. Neither is the current postmodern approach that there are nice rules and then an area of chaos 
"because language is that way." Our practical view is that a LR is useful for lexical acquisition if
102 
it is easily discoverable and very productive. We do not expect any such LR to be exception-free, 
and our methodology is comfortable dealing with those exceptions. 
Acknowledgment 
The research reported in this paper was supported by Contract MDA904-92-C-5189 with the U.S. 
Department ofDefense. Victor Raskin is grateful to Purdue University for permitting him to serve 
as a consultant for the CRL/NMSU MikroKosmos project. Both authors feel indebted to the other 
members of the MikroKosmos team. 
References 
Abraham, Werner 1970. Passiv und Verbableitung auf e. -able, dt. -bar. Folio Linguistica 4, pp. 38-52. 
Beale, Stephen, Sergei Nirenburg, and Kavi Mahesh 1995. Semantic Analysis in the Mikrokosmos Machine Transla- 
tion Project. In Proceedings of the Second Symposium on Natural Language Processing (SNLP-95), August 2-4. 
Bangkok, Thailand. 
Beckwith, Richard, Christiane Fellbaum, Derek Gross, and George A. Miller 1991. WordNet: A lexical database or- 
ganized on psych01inguistic principles. In: Uri Zernik (ed.), Lexical Acquisition: Exploiting On-line Resources to 
Build a Lexicon. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, pp. 211-232. 
Bierwisch, Mantled 1967. Some semantic universals of German adjectivals. Foundations of Language 5:1, pp. 1-36. 
Bierwisch, Manfred 1989. Focussing on dimensional adjectives: Introductory remarks. In: Manfred Bierwisch and 
Ewald Lang (eds.), Dimensional Adjectives and Conceptual Interpretation. Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 
pp. 1-11. 
Bouillon, Pierrette, and Viegas, Evelyne 1994. A semi-polymorphic approach to the interpretation of adjectival con- 
structions: A cross-linguistic perspective. In: Proceedings ofthe SixthEURALEX International Congress, Amster- 
dam: Free University of Amsterdam, pp. 36-44. 
Chierchia, Gennaro, and Sally McConnell-Ginet 1990. Meaning and Grammar: An Introduction to Semantics. 
Cambridge, MA-London: M.I.T. Press. 
Dowty, David 1972. Temporally descriptive adjectives. In: John Kimball (ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. I. New 
York: Seminar Press. 
Frawley, William 1992. Linguistic Semantics. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. 
Greimas, A. J. 1966. Stmautiqne strueturelle. Paris: Larousse. 
Hail, Fitzedward 1877. On English Adjectives in -ABLE with Special Reference to RELIABLE. London: Trtibner. 
Jackendoff, Ray 1983. Semantics and Cognition. Cambridge, MA-London: M.I.T. Press. 
Jespersen, Otto 1942. A modern English Grammar on Itistorieal Principles. Part 6: Morphology. Copenhagen: 
Munksgaard. 
Justeson, John S., and Slava M. Katz 1991. Co-occurrences of antonymous adjectives and their contexts. Computa- 
tional Linguistics 17:1, pp. 1-19. 
Justeson, John S., and Slava M. Katz 1995. Principled isambiguation: Discriminating adjective senses with modified 
nouns. Computational Linguistics 21:1, pp. 1-27. 
Katz, Jerrold 1972: Semantic theory and the meaning of good. Journal of Philosophy 61, pp. 736-760. 
Keenan, Edward L,, and L. M. Faltz 1985. Boolean Semantics for Natural Language. Dordrecht-Boston: D. Reidel. 
5K~ellmer, G6ran 1986. Legible but not readable: On the semantics of English adjectives in -ble. Studio Neophilologica 
:1, pp. 11-38. 
Lahav, Ran 1989. Against compositionality: The case of adjectives. Philosophical Studies 57, pp. 261-279. 
Mahesh, Kavi 1996. Ontology Development for Machine Translation: Ideology and Methodology. Memoranda in 
Computer and Cognitive Science MCCS-96-292. Las Cruces, N M New Mexico State University 
Mahesh, Kavi, and Sergei Nirenburg 1995. A situated ontology for practical NLP. A paper presented atthe IJCAI '95 
Workshop on Basic Ontological Issues in Knowledge Sharing. Montreal, August 19-21. 
Marchand, Hans 1960. The Categories and Types of Present-Day English Word-Formation. Wiesbaden. 
Marx, Wolfgang 1977. Die Kontextabh~ingigkeit d rAssoziativen Bedeutung. Zeitschriflfiir experimentelle und an- 
gewandte Psychologie 24, pp. 455-462. 
Marx, Wolfgang 1983. The meaning-confining function of the adjective. In: by Gert Rickheit and Michael Bock (eds.), 
Psycholinguistic studies in language processing. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp. 70-81. 
McCawley, James D- 1988. The Syntactic Phenomena of English, Vol. II. Chicago: Chicago University Press. 
Meus, V. 1975. English adjectives in -able. Studia Germanica Gandensia 16, pp. 35-59. 
103 
Nirenburg, Sergei, Jaime Carbonell, Masaru Tomita, and Kenneth Goodman 1992. Machine Translation: A Knowl- 
edge-Based Approach. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Nirenburg, Sergei, Victor Raskin, and Boyan Onyshkevych 1994. Apologiae ontologiae. Memoranda inComputer and 
Cognitive Science MCCS-95-281. New Mexico State University: Computing Research Laboratory. Reprinted in: Ju- 
dith Klavans, Bran Boguraev, Loft Levin, and James Pustejovsky (eds.), Symposium: Representation a d Acquisi- 
tion of Lexical Knowledge: Polysemy, Ambiguity, and Generativity. Working Notes. AAAI SpdngSymposium 
Series. Stanford, CA: Stanford University, 1995, pp. 95-107. Repfintedin ashortened version in: TMI95: Proceed- 
ings of the Sixth International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation. 
Centre for Computational Linguistics, Catholic Universities Leuven, Belgium, 1995, pp. 106-114. 
Onyshkevych, Boyan, and Sergei Nirenburg 1994. The lexicon in the scheme of KBMT things. Memoranda inCom- 
puter and Cognitive Science MCCS-94-277. Las Cruces, N.M.: New Mexico State University. 
Pustejovsky, James 1995. The Generative Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Raskin, Victor, and Sergei Nirenburg 1995. Lexical semantics of adjectives: A microtheory of adjectival meaning. 
Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science MCCS-95-288. Las Cruces, N.M.: New Mexico State University. 
Raskin, Victor, and Sergei Nirenburg 1996. Adjectival modification in text meaning representation. Proceedings of 
COLING '96. Copenhagen. 
Siegel, Muffy E. A. 1976. Capturing the Adjective, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
MA. 
Siegel, Muffy E. A. 1979. Measure adjectives inMontague grammars. In: Steven Davis and Marianne Mithun (eds.), 
Linguistics, Philosophy, and Montague Grammar. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, pp. 223-261. 
Smadja, Frank 1991. Macrocoding the lexicon with co-occurrence knowledge. In: Uri Zernik (ed.), Lexical Acquisi- 
tion: Exploiting On-line Resources to Build a Lexicon. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, pp. 165-189. 
Spang-Hanssen, Ebbe 1990. La s6mantique des adjectifs patieux. Revue Romane 25:2, pp. 292-309. 
Spejewski, Beverly 1995. Two classes of frequency adverbs. Paper presented atthe LSA Annual Meeting. 
Szalay, L. B., and J. Deese 1978. Subjective Meaning and Culture: An Assessment Through Word Association. 
Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. 
Teller, Paul 1969. Some discussion and extension ofM. Bierwisch's work on German adjectivals. Foundations of Lan- 
guage 5, pp. 185-217. 
Viegas, Evelyne, Boyan Onyshkevych, Victor Raskin, and Sergei Nirenburg 1996. From submit to submitted via sub- 
mission: On lexical rules in large-scale xicon acquisition. In:Proceedings ofACL '96. Santa Cruz, CA: University 
of California. 
Viegas, Evelyne, and Victor Raskin 1996. Lexical Acquisition: Guidelines and Methodology. Memoranda inComput- 
er and Cognitive Science MCCS-96-2xx. Las Cruces, N.M.: New Mexico State University (in preparation). 
Zhurinskiy, Alfred N. 1971. O semanticheskoy strukture prostranstvennykh prilagatel'nykh/On the semantic structure 
of spatial adjectives/. In: Semanticheskaya struktura slova, Moscow: Nauka, pp. 196-24. 
104 
