Referring in Multimodal Systems: 
The Importance of User Expertise and System Features 
Danie la  Pet re l l i  
IRST - Istituto per la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica 
1-38050 Povo - Trento, Italy 
petrelli@irst, itc. it 
Antone l la  De  Ange l i  Wa l te r  Gerb ino  G iu l ia  Cassano  
Cognitive Technology Lab. - Psychology Dept.- University of Trieste 
Via deU'Universit?, 7 - 34123 Trieste - Italy 
deangeli,gerbino,cassano~univ.t rieste it 
Abstract  forth HCI) (Schmauks, 1987). Currently, little em- 
This paper empirically investigates how hu- 
mans use reference in space when inter- 
acting with a multimodal system able to 
understand written natural anguage and 
pointing with the mouse. 
We verified that user expertise plays an 
important role in the use of multimodal 
systems: experienced users performed 84% 
multimodal inputs while inexpert only 
30%. Moreover experienced are able to ef- 
ficiently use multimodality shortening the 
written input and transferring part of the 
reference meaning on the pointing. 
Results showed also the importance of the 
system layout: when very short labels 
(one character) are available users strongly 
adopt a redundant reference strategy, i.e. 
they referred to the object in a linguistic 
way and use pointing too. 
Starting from these facts some guidelines 
for future multimodal systems are sug- 
gested. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Multimodal communication is used frequently and 
efficiently by humans to identify objects in physi- 
cal space. By combining different modalities (e.g. 
speech and gestures), multimodal references act as 
efficient ools for coping with the complexity of the 
physical space -as conveyed by visual perception- 
which can be communicate only partially by verbal 
expressions (Glenberg and McDaniel, 1992). There- 
fore, multimodal references can easily substitute too 
complex, too detailed, ambiguous, or undetermined 
verbal expressions. In particular, they simplify refer- 
ent identification when the speaker or the hearer do 
not know the name of the target, or how to describe 
it. 
For a long time, face-to-face communication has 
been considered a reliable model for natural an- 
guage based human-computer interaction (hence- 
pirical work is available on what actually happens in 
multimodal HCI and how communication features 
cohabit with modern graphical interfaces (Oviatt, 
1996; De Angeli et al, 1996; Oviatt et al, 1997; 
Siroux et al, 1995). Moreover, with only a few 
exceptions (Buxton, 1991; Brennan, 1991; Stock, 
1995), direct manipulation i terfaces have been seen 
as an antagonist ofconversational interfaces, hinder- 
ing a desirable synergy between the two communi- 
cation styles. 
We believe that in multimodal HCI users find 
strategies that overcome natural language communi- 
cation or direct manipulation paradigm alone, creat- 
ing a new mixed communication form that makes the 
best use of both (Oviatt, 1996; Oviatt et al, 1997). 
The new communication, even if similar in principle 
to face-to-face communication, might be carried out 
in a far different fashion because one partner is a 
computer. As a matter of fact, some studies howed 
that people do adopt conversational and social rules 
when interacting with computers (Nass et al, 1994) 
but humans also design their utterances with the 
special partner in mind (Brennan, 1991). 
Empirical studies on natural language human- 
computer interaction confirm general HCI peculiar- 
ities. Talkingto a computer humans maintain a 
conversational framework but tend to simplify the 
syntactic structure, to reduce utterances length, lex- 
icon richness and use of pronouns (Jonsson and 
Dahlback, 1988; Dahlback and Jonsson, 1989; Ovi- 
att, 1995). In other words users select a simplified 
register to interact with computers even if the (sim- 
ulated) system has human capabilities (De Angeli, 
1991). 
These results suggest hat face-to-face communi- 
cation is not an adequate model for HCI. Therefore 
empirical studies are needed to develop predictive 
models of multimodal communication in HCI. 
Empirical research becomes even more important 
when a multimodal system reproduces an unnatu- 
ral modality combination, such as writing combined 
with pointing. Pointing while writing is highly dif- 
ferent from pointing while speaking. In the first case, 
Referring in Multimodal Systems 15 
in fact, multimodal communication is hampered by 
a single-modality-production constraint. Indeed, the 
requirement of moving the dominant hand back and 
forth between the keyboard and a pointing device 
implies a substitution of the natural parallel syn- 
chronization pattern (Levelt et al, 1985) with an un- 
natural sequential one. Nevertheless, the obligation 
of using the same effector for writing and pointing 
does not seem to have any inhibitory effect on mul- 
timodal input production (De Angeli et al, 1996). 
In general, deixis 1 was found to be the most fre- 
quent referent identification strategy adopted by 
users to indicate objects. However, its occur- 
rence depends trongly on the effort needed to in- 
dicate the target by a pure verbal reference. More- 
over, we found a relevant percentage of redundant 
references 2, a strategy mentioned in the relevant lit- 
erature only for speech and pointing (Siroux et al, 
1995) and pretty different from common face-to-face 
communication strategies (De Angeli et al, 1996). 
Following the iterative design principles (Nielsen, 
1993), we assume that experimental research, in the 
form of early simulations, should improve multi- 
modal design by allowing to formulate reliable guide- 
lines. From this point of view, the purpose of this 
paper is to investigate the effect of user expertise and 
system features on multimodal interaction in order 
to infer useful guidelines for future systems. 
2 HCI  issues in mult imodal  referring 
In a HCI context where the user is required to write 
and point, we analyze the communication strategies 
that users spontaneously adopted at the very begin- 
ning of interaction. The main purpose of analyz- 
ing users' spontaneous behavior is to develop design 
guidelines that might be taken into account when 
developing multimodal systems that have to support 
successful interaction from the very beginning, like 
"walk-up-and-use" interfaces. 
Results of a simulation experiment have been an- 
alyzed to answer the following question: 
Is multimodal interaction really 
instinctive, i.e. do naive users 
perform as experienced ones? 
In general, multimodal systems appear to improve 
HCI by allowing humans to communicate in a more 
spontaneous way (Oviatt and Olsen, 1994; Oviatt, 
1996). Therefore, one could infer that multimodal 
communication is the best interaction style for naive 
1Deixis concerns the ways in which languages encode 
or grammaticalize f atures of the context of utterance 
or speech event (Levinson, 1983). Among the various 
types we consider here only space or place deixis used in 
a gestural way. 
2We defined redundant reference as multimodal ref- 
erences composed by a full linguistic reference and a not 
needed additional pointing. 
users. However, some authors suggest that lan- 
guage based interaction is mainly suitable for ex- 
perienced users (Hutchins et al, 1986; Gentner and 
Nielsen, 1996). Indeed the opacity of language al- 
lows very flexible interaction, but requires previous 
knowledge 3. We believe that experience, defined as 
computer science literacy, may increase the efficient 
use of multimodality. The notion of efficiency is de- 
fined, following (Mac Aogain and Reilly, 1990), as 
the capacity of the multimodal input to derive im- 
portant semantic parts from information channels 
other than language, i.e. from pointing. In other 
words, efficiency is operationalized asthe proportion 
of written input replaced by the gestural one. 
3 Method 
In order to evaluate spontaneous multimodal input 
production, data from the training session of a sim- 
ulation experiment were analyzed. 
P rocedure  The multimodal system called SIM, 
Sistema Interattivo per la Modulistica, was simu- 
lated to assist students with form filling tasks. Con- 
versing with SIM, users had to gather information 
on how to fill out form fields (user questions) and to 
provide personal data for automatic insertion (user 
answers). Hard-copy instructions described system 
capability and required participants to complete the 
task as quickly and accurately as possible. No exam- 
ples of dialogue were directly given, to avoid biasing 
communication behavior. Participants worked indi- 
vidually in a user room and were monitored by a 
closed circuit camera. Dialogues and pointing were 
logged and interactions videotaped uring all exper- 
imental sessions. At the end all students filled in a 
user satisfaction questionnaire (USQ) and were de- 
briefed. 
S imulat ion  The system was simulated by the 
Wizard of Oz technique, in which a human (the 
wizard) plays the role of the computer behind 
the human-computer interface (Fraser and Gilbert, 
1991). A semi-automatic procedure supported the 
simulation that was carried out on two connected 
SUN SPARC workstations. Interface constraints 
and several pre-loaded utterances (including a cou- 
ple of prefixed answers for every task-relevant action, 
error messages, help and welcoming phrases) sup- 
ported two trained wizards. These strategies have 
been found to increase simulation reliability by re- 
ducing response delays and lessening the attentional 
demand on the wizard (Oviatt et al, 1992). 
The user interface was composed by a dialogue 
window in the upper part and a form window in the 
lower part of the screen (figure 1). In the dialogue 
3This is opposite to WYSIWYG (What You See Is 
What You Get) interfaces where what can be done is 
clearly visible. 
16 D. Petrelli, A. DeAngeli,  W. Gerbino and G. Cassano 
-~ ; t l~  ?~s D4~ctte ~ l ~  ta a ~tsA  ~s~ta  et r ~  ? ~ttss l  mi io  ~t~,~a ~ v ~  ~4 ~ m 
mcmtt~i ,b , .~ v t ,p t . ,  ~t~g, t  Ct. ?1. I 
umrtm * rs. ~L. ,~,. 4 
In  fo r le~la~ ~.  re,Ll 
l nPo~mons ,  t~ l~ts l~ '  I 
ff .......... o'.._~.'.'.'...o n ~ t ~;'i;J~,. '"'""n 
L~?o~luoe~ Lk,.~i,aU U"  ~1 ....... ' - -  m : .............. Ci=~ ......... U .... ; ' : ' :  \[ 
O 
Figure 1: The user screen during an interaction. 
window users typed their input and read system out- 
put. Pointing was supported by mouse and pointer 
was constrained inside the form window. 
SIM was simulated with good dialogue capabili- 
ties, anyway still far away from human abilities. It 
accepted every type of multimodal references, i.e. 
with or without linguistic anchorage for the gesture 
and either close or far pointing. It could understand 
ellipses and complete linguistic references. 
The form layout had nine fields grouped in three 
rows. Rows and fields had meaningful labels (one or 
two words) suggesting the required content. Users 
could refer both to single fields and to rows as a 
whole. At row selection SIM gave instruction on the 
whole row content. After users received row infor- 
mation, to further fields selection corresponded more 
synthetic instructions. 
SIM required to click on the referred field and gave 
visual feedback to this 4. It supported multiple refer- 
ences too. System answers were always multimodal 
with demonstrative pronouns and synchronized (vi- 
sual) pointing. 
Par t i c ipants  and  Des ign Twenty five students 
from Trieste University participated in the simula- 
tions as paid volunteers. Ages of participants ranged 
from 20 to 31 and all were Italian native speakers. 
Participants were grouped in two different sets 
according to their computer experience. Selection 
was achieved by a self-administered questionnaire on 
computer attitude and experience. Half sample was 
represented by experienced users, skilled typists with 
positive attitude towards computers and some pro- 
gramming experience. The other half was composed 
by students who had never used a computer before. 
4In a previous study we demonstrated that visual 
feedback allows more efficient multimodal input, in- 
creases integration of pointing within writing and is pre- 
ferred by users (De Angeli et al, 1996; De Angeli, 1997). 
4 Results and Discussion 
Data were available from 24 participants yielding a 
corpus of 210 user questions (due to technical prob- 
lems one inexpert was discarded). User answers had 
to provide personal data for automatic insertion, but 
they did not require to identify fields. So user an- 
swers were not included in the analysis. 
Each user question was tabulated in one of the fol- 
lowing five categories according to the referent iden- 
tification strategy adopted in it: 
? d i rect  naming:  it is a unimodal reference and 
occurs when the field label is explicitly used in 
the utterance, e.g., il campo dati anagrafici (the 
personal data field); 
? l anguage re ference:  it is a unimodal refer- 
ence and occurs whenever the field is referred 
by a pure verbal input, but without direct nam- 
ing, e.g., l'ultimo campo (the last field). This 
category includes, among others, anaphoric ref- 
erence and metonymia; 
? deixis: it is a multimodal reference that occurs 
whenever an explicit anchor (deictic linguistic 
expression) for the pointing exists, e.g., questo 
,,2 campo ( th is /2  field); 
? mixed:  it is a multimodal reference that occurs 
when the reference contains both linguistic and 
gestural part, but no deictic mark can be found 
in the utterance, e.g., in / z  (in ,7); 
? redundant :  it is a multimodal reference; it oc- 
curs when one component (or part of it) is not 
needed for the understanding, e.g., il campo A 
/2 (the field A /2 ) .  
Figure 2 shows percentages of each referent iden- 
tification strategies as a function of user exper- 
tise. It clearly emerges that previous knowledge 
affects strategy selection. Multimodal input were 
strongly preferred by expert users, while inexpert 
Experienced Umtlrm Unt~mrt  Uzrm 
m D~ec~ nm~a i 
m Lm~aqie t'z/zrmr-t 
m D~ 
I n N  
Figure 2: Referent identification strategies percent- 
ages as a factor of users expertise. 
Referring in Multimodal Systems 17 
Ic 1 j :  ....................... :J 
0 
II II 
l 
II 
Figure 3: The MIS layout. 
preferred unimodal inguistic references, especially 
direct naming 5. These results imply that communi- 
cation behavior may be predicted by knowing previ- 
ous expertise. 
Multimodal occurrence strongly increased effi- 
ciency of communication. Utterance length was 
found to be inverse correlated to the number of mul- 
timodal input (r=.48, p<.05). In average, expert 
users wrote almost 3 words each utterance, while 
inexpert nearly the double 6. 
It is interesting to notice that, on the total sam- 
ple, deixis and mixed input occur close to the same 
frequency. Mixed input implies a contraction of ver- 
bal input which is partially substituted by pointing, 
as in cosa /z (what /z). This phenomenon is pe- 
culiar to HCI, and pretty infrequent in face to face 
communication where deixis (e.g. cosa qui 7 - what 
here/~-) represent the maximum efficient input. 
Redundant input was pretty rare, with no signif- 
icant difference due to expertise. This finding is in 
contrast with what we observed in (De Angeli et 
al., 1996). There, the simulated system, called MIS 
(Multimodal Intelligent System), had a quite differ- 
ent layout: each field had a very short label (a single 
letter) not related to the required content of the field 
(figure 3). With this layout redundant input was the 
25% of the total. 
We evince that the significant different rate when 
interacting with the two systems was due to form 
layouts. Indeed, redundant references in the case 
where labels were one character long was no-cost 
compared to the case where labels where one/two 
words long. This suggests that system layout may 
influence communication behavior. In the next 
5According to the results of a Mann-Whitney U test 
the ratio of multirnodal input to total questions in the 
two experience groups is statistically significant, U = 
10,5, (N=23) p<.001 .
6The difference is significant according to results of 
an ANOVA F(1,22) = 12.21 p<.001 .
chapter we discuss related guidelines. 
When designing whatever system, specialists 
should consider both system functionalities and in- 
teraction features depending on the typology of users 
and on the tasks they will perform. In current multi- 
modal systems, this balancing among functionalities 
and users has not been considered enough. 
For example, the obligation for the user to point 
at a certain time while writing was found to be in 
contrast with his/her natural inclination. This con- 
straint would be justified only if synchronization u - 
derstanding is a true problem, e.g. if the users use 
multiple selection or pars-pro-toto. Our data show 
that, at least, this is not the case at the beginning 
of the interaction: expert used multiple selection in 
the 0.22% of the total multimodal references while 
for inexpert he percentage decrease furthermore to 
0.14%. 
5 Lessons  Learned  and  Proposed  
Gu ide l ines  
In this section we state some guidelines useful for 
designers of walk-up-and-use multimodal systems or 
for systems that have to have a successful interaction 
from the very beginning. 
As widely discussed above, user expertise is a fac- 
tor that deeply influences multimodal interaction. 
In our experiments, experienced users took advan- 
tage of multimodality in the 84% of all the consid- 
ered interactions. At the opposite, multimodality 
was not exploited by the inexpert hat used it only 
for 30%. These data indicate that multimodal sys- 
tems are definitely suited for expert users even from 
the very beginning of the interaction, while inexperts 
have difficulties in exploiting multimodality interac- 
tion limiting themselves to inefficient linguistic ref- 
erences. 
To help a naive user to overcome this initial gap, 
it may be useful to plan some mechanisms, uch as 
contextual help or specific tutoring answers, aiming 
at directing linguistic references toward multimodal 
ones. This strategy could be especially important 
in systems, like tourist kiosks, where the user might 
have difficulties in stating the name correctly. 
Another interesting point is that experienced 
users perform nearly the same percentage of deixis 
(38%) and of mixed modality (42%). This suggests 
that systems hould be flexible enough to accept 
whatever combination of pointing and writing, not 
requiring a well formed deixis. 
An important guideline is therefore to not require 
a prefixed behavior from the user, to say to not pre- 
tend well formed deixis or the pointing in a specific 
position. We claim that flexibility has to be pre- 
ferred to more sophisticated system facilities, such 
as multiple pointing, since users do not make the 
most of them. 
18 D. Petrelli, A. DeAngeli, W. Gerbino and G. Cassano 
The flexibility concept is strengthened bythe fact 
that users can find very efficient ways for referring, 
optimizing writing and pointing and exploiting the 
context as in ,,/z?,, where the meaning is conveyed 
by the gesture, by the minimal writing and by con- 
sidering the task the user is performing. 
Consequently, a further step toward a flexible sys- 
tem would be to use all the possible information 
sources to interpret user multimodal input, to say 
not only linguistic and gestural input but also dis- 
course history and task model. 
Lastly, the influence of the layout on the user be- 
havior has to be underlined. In fact, the possibil- 
ity of referring to objects in a no-cost linguistic way 
(e.g. a single character) encourages the user to use 
redundant references. This suggests to design the 
interface using very short labels whenever a double 
reference is useful to discriminate objects, for exam- 
ple on dense maps. 
More in general, we verified that conclusive re- 
suits coming from related fields can not be sim- 
ply transferred to the multimodal domain. This 
is the case of models from human-human commu- 
nication that do not exhaustively describe all phe- 
nomena occurring in multimodal human-computer 
interaction. For example, we showed that mixed 
inputs like cosa ,7 (what /z) are pretty frequent 
whereas they are hardly used in face to face dia- 
logues. Similarly, Gestalt guidelines for graphical 
interface design may not have the expected effect on 
users behavior in complex multimodal referring. For 
example, even thought rows of objects are clearly 
displayed (a frame around homogeneous objects let 
the user perceive a single set), users seldom refer 
to rows (e.g. by their title or by clicking the row 
background) preferring repeated references to each 
object. 
Building on our experience, we believe that, even 
if some work has been already done, empirical inves- 
tigations are still needed to complete the picture of 
human-computer multimodal interaction. 
Acknowledgments  
This research was partially supported by the CNR 
Grant for the project "An ecological approach to the 
implementation a d evolution of multimodal sys- 
tems". 
Re ferences  
Susan Brennan. 1991. Conversation as direct ma- 
nipulation: An iconoclastic view. In Brenda Lau- 
rel, editor, The Art of Human-Computer Interface 
Design, pages 393-404. Addison-Wesley. 
Bill Buxton. 1991. The "natural" language of 
interaction: A perspective on nonverbal dia- 
logues. In Brenda Laurel, editor, The Art of 
Human-Computer Interface Design, pages 405- 
416. Addison-Wesley. 
Nils Dahlback and Arne Jonsson. 1989. Empiri- 
cal studies of discourse representations fornatural 
language interfaces. In ~th European Conference 
of ACL, pages 291-298. 
Antonella De Angeli, Daniela Petrelli, and Walter 
Gerbino. 1996. Interface features affecting deixis 
production: A simulation study. In WIGLS - 
Workshop on the Integration of Gesture in Lan- 
guage and Speech (at ICSLP'96), pages 195-204. 
Antonella De Angeli. 1991. Dillo a MAIA. Master's 
thesis, Psychology Dept.- University of Trieste. 
Antonella De Angeli. 1997. Valutare i sistemi 
flessibili: un approccio globale alia HCI. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Trieste. 
N. Fraser and G. Gilbert. 1991. Simulating speech 
systems. Computer Speech and Language, pages 
81-99. 
Don Gentner and Jakob Nielsen. 1996.  The 
anti-mac interface. Communication of the ACM, 
39(8):70-82. 
A. Glenberg and M. McDaniel. 1992. Mental 
models, pictures, and text: Integration of spatial 
and verbal information. Memory and Cognition, 
20(5):458-460. 
Edwin L. Hutchins, James D. Hollan, and Donald A. 
Norman. 1986. Direct manipulation i terfaces. In 
Donald A. Norman and Stephen W. Draper, edi- 
tors, User Centered System Design: new Perspec- 
tives on Human-Computer Interaction, chapter 5, 
pages 87-124. Lawrance Erlbaum Associates. 
Arne Jonsson and Nils Dahlback. 1988. Talking 
to a computer is not like talking to your best 
friend. In Scandinavian Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence- SCAI'88, pages 53-68. 
Willem Levelt, Graham Richardson, and Wido 
La Heij. 1985. Pointing and voicing in deictic 
expressions. Journal of Memory and Language, 
24:133-164. 
Stephan Levinson. 1983. Pragmatics. Cambridge 
Textbook in Linguistics. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Eoghan Mac Aogain and Ronan Reilly. 1990. Dis- 
course theory and interface design: The case of 
pointing with the mouse. International Journal 
of Man-Machine Studies, 32:591-602. 
Clifford Nass, Jonathan Steuer, and Ellen Tauber. 
1994. Computers are social actors. In CH1'94 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 72- 
78. ACM Press. 
Jakob Nielsen. 1993. Usability Engineering. Ac- 
demic Press. 
Referring in Mult imodal Systems 19 
Sharon Oviatt and Eric Olsen. 1994. Integration 
themes in multimodal human-computer interac- 
tion. In International Conference on Spoken Lan- 
guage Processing, pages 551-554. 
Sharon Oviatt, Philip Cohen, M. Fong, and 
M. Frank. 1992. A rapid semiautomatic simula- 
tion technique for investigating interactive speech 
and hand writing. In International Conference on 
Spoken Language Processing, pages 1351-1354. 
Sharon Oviatt, Antonella De Angeli, and Karen 
Kuhn. 1997. Integration and synchronization of
input modes during multimodal human-computer 
interaction. In CHI'97- Human Factors on Com- 
puting Systems. ACM Press. 
Sharon Oviatt. 1995. Predicting spoken disfluences 
during human-computer interaction. Computer 
Speech and Language, 9:19-35. 
Sharon Oviatt. 1996. Multimodal interfaces for dy- 
namic interactive maps. In CHI'96 - Human Fac- 
tors in Computing Systems. ACM Press. 
Dagmar Schmauks. 1987. Natural and simulated 
pointing: An interdisciplinary survey. Technical 
report, FB Informatik, Universit~it Saarbriicken. 
Jacques Siroux, M. Guyomard, F. Multon, and 
C. Remondeau. 1995. Oral and gestural activi- 
ties of the users in the georal system. In H. Bunt, 
R. Beun, and T. Borghuis, editors, International 
Conference on Cooperative Multimodal Communi- 
cation (CMC'95), volume 2, pages 287-298, May. 
Oliviero Stock. 1995. A third modality? Artificial 
Intelligence Review, 9:129-146. 
