Deal ing wi th  Mult i l ingual i ty in a Spoken Language Query 
" Translator 
Pascale Fung, Bertram Shi, Dekai Wu, Lain Wai Bun, Wong Shuen Kong 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Dept. of Computer Science 
University of Science & Technology (HKUST) 
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong 
{pascale, eebert }tee. ust. hk, dekai?cs, ust. hk 
Abstract 
Robustness i an important issue for mul- 
tilingual speech interfaces for spoken lan- 
guage translation systems. We have stud- 
ied three aspects of robustness in such a 
system: accent differences, mixed language 
input, and the use of common feature sets 
for HMM-based speech recognizers for En- 
glish and Cantonese. The results of our 
preliminary experiments show that accent 
differences cause recognizer performance to 
degrade. A rather surprising finding is 
that for mixed language input, a straight 
forward implementation of a mixed lan- 
guage model-based speech recognizer per- 
forms less well than the concatenation of
pure language recognizers. Our experimen- 
tal results also show that a common fea- 
ture set, parameter set, and common algo- 
rithm lead to different performance output 
for Cantonese and English speech recogni- 
tion modules. 
1 In t roduct ion  
In the past few decades, automatic speech recog- 
nition (ASR) and machine translation (MT) have 
both undergone rapid technical progress. Spoken 
language translation has emerged as a new field com- 
bining the advances in ASR and MT(Levin et al, 
1995; Mayfield et al, 1995; Lavie et al, 1995; Vi- 
lar et al, 1996). Robustness i a critical issue which 
must be addressed for this technology to be useful in 
real applications. There are several robustness i sues 
arising from the multilingual characteristics ofmany 
spoken language translation systems which have not 
studied by the speech recognition community since 
the latter tends to focus on monolingual recognition 
systems. 
One problem in a multilingual system is accent 
variability. It is frequently assumed that the speak- 
ers using a system are native speakers belonging 
to the same accent group. However, this is not 
generally true. For example, in Hong Kong, al- 
though many people can speak English, one encoun- 
ters a large variety of different accents ince in addi- 
tion to Hong Kong's large population of Cantonese 
speakers, there are also many Mandarin speakers 
and many Indian, British, American and Australian 
Hong Kong residents. 
Another problem with multilinguality is mixed 
language recognition. Although the official lan- 
guages of Hong Kong are English, spoken Cantonese 
and written Mandarin, most Hong Kongers speak 
a hybrid of English and Cantonese. In fact, since 
many native Cantonese speakers do not know the 
Chinese translations of many English terms, forcing 
them to speak in pure Cantonese is impractical and 
unrealistic. 
A third problem is the complexity of the design of 
recognizers for multiple languages. Many large mul- 
tilingual spoken language translation systems uch 
as JANUS (Lavie et al, 1995) and the C-STAR Con- 
sortium decouple the development of speech recog- 
nition interfaces for different languages. However, 
for developers of a multilingual system at one single 
site, it would be more efficient if the speech interfaces 
for the different languages shared a common engine 
with one set of features, one set of parameters, one 
recognition algorithm and one system architecture, 
but differed in the parameter values used. 
We are studying the issues raised above in the 
domain of a traveling business-person's query trans- 
lation system (Figure 1). This translator is a sym- 
metrical query/response ystem. Both ends of the 
system recognize input speech from human through 
a common recognition engine comprising of either a 
concatenated or a mixed language recognizer. Af- 
ter the speech is decoded into text, the translator 
converts one language to another. Both ends of the 
system have a speech synthesizer for output speech. 
The domain of our system is restricted to points 
of interest to a traveling business-person, such as 
names and directions of business districts, confer- 
ence centers, hotels, money exchange, restaurants. 
We are currently implementing such a system with 
Cantonese and English as the main languages. We 
40 
use HMM-based, isolated word recognition system 
as the recognition engine, and a statistical transla- 
tor for the translation engine. 
2 Does  accent  a f fec t  speech  
recogn izer  per fo rmance?  
We have performed a set of experiments ocompare 
tile effect of different accents. We train two sets 
of models: an English model using native American 
English speakers as reference and a Cantonese model 
using native Cantonese speakers as references. Word 
models of 34 (17 English and 17 Cantonese) simple 
commands were trained using 6 utterances of each 
command per speaker. The models were evaluated 
using a separate set of native Cantonese and native 
American English speakers. The recognition results 
are shown in Figure 2. 
Our experimental results support the claim that 
recognition accuracy degrades in the presence of an 
unmodelled accent. In order to bring the recognizer 
performance for the non-native speaker to that of 
the native speaker, we need to improve the mod- 
els in the recognizer. An  obvious solution seems 
to train the model on different accents. However, 
it is quite a daunting task to train every language 
with every type of accent. One approximation is 
to train the system with a mixture of separate lan- 
guages so that the model parameters would capture 
the spectral characteristics of more than one lan- 
guage. A mechanism for gradual accent adaptation 
might potentially increase recognition accuracies of 
the speech recognizers of both source and target lan- 
guages. 
3 How to  dea l  w i th  mixed  language 
recogn i t ion?  
Consider two possible ways to implement a mixed 
language recognizer--(1) Use two pure monolingual 
recognizers to recognize different parts of the mixed 
language separately; (2) Use a single mixed language 
model where the word network allows words in both 
languages. Method (1) requires ome sort of lan- 
guage identification toswitch between two recogniz- 
ers whereas method (2) seems to be more flexible 
and efficient. 
We compared the recognition accuracies of a pure 
language recognizer with a mixed language recog- 
nizer. In the pure language recognizer, the word 
candidates are all from a single language dictio- 
nary, whereas the mixed language dictionary con- 
tains words from two dictionaries. See Figure 3. In 
the concatenation model, we assume a priori knowl- 
edge (possibly from a language identifier) of the lan- 
guage ID of the words. The expected recognition rate 
of the concatenation model is the product of the ac- 
curacies of the pure language model. 
From this preliminary experiment, we discover 
that although a mired language model offers greater 
flexibility to the speaker, it has a considerably ower 
performance than that of the concatenation of two 
pure language models. The reason for such a per- 
formance degradation ofa mixed model is not diffi- 
cult to deduce--the dictionary of a mixed model has 
more candidates. Consequently, the search result is 
less accurate. If the recognizer knows a priori which 
dictionary (English or Chinese) it should search for 
a particular word, it would make less error. 
This is therefore a potentially interesting prob- 
lem. Should we incorporate a language identifier in 
parallel to the recognizers or should we accept ile 
loss in recognition rate but enjoy the flexibility of 
a mixed language recognizer? We will implement a 
language identifier and carry out more experiments 
to compare the output from the recognizers. 
4 Can  the  source  and  ta rget  
languages  share  the  same 
recogn i t ion  eng ine?  
One important issue for multilinguality in a spoken 
language translator is the complexity of implement- 
ing more than one recognizer in the system. An effi- 
cient approach is to use recognizers which are iden- 
tical except for parameter values. Will this enable 
robust recognizers? 
The word-based HMM recognizers for English and 
Cantonese use identical features (Nine MFCCs and 
nine delta MFCCs.) The same microphone was used 
to record both languages. The same initialization 
procedure was used to initialize the recognizer for 
both languages. For English, the number of HMM 
states is deduced from spectrograms. For Cantonese, 
it is deduced from phoneme numbers for each word. 
The recognizers were evaluated using native English 
and Cantonese speakers who were not in the training 
set. 
In general, the English recognizer is more robust 
than our Cantonese recognizer even though identi- 
cal parameter set, training and testing mechanisms 
are used. Rather than jumping to the conclusion 
that a different feature set is needed for Cantonese, 
we would like to find out what other factors could 
cause a lower performance of the Cantonese recog- 
nizer. For example, we would like to perform exper- 
iments on a larger number of speakers to determine 
whether training and test speaker mismatch caused 
such a performance degradation. 
5 Conc lus ion  and  fu ture  work  
In this paper, we have examined three issues con- 
cerning the robustness of multilingual speech inter- 
faces for spoken language translation systems: ac- 
cent differences, mixed language input, and the use 
of common feature sets for HMM-based speech rec- 
ognizers for English and Cantonese. From the re- 
41 
\[ l ' ouest  de 
of/*w*'t/~ ~~ 
Figure 1: A symmetrical system as traveling business-person's query translator 
Figure 2: Speech recognizers perform better on native speakers 
Native speaker English model Cantonese model 
English 94% 77% 
Cantonese 86% 90% 
Average 90% 83% 
Figure 3: Speech recognizers perform better with concatenated pure language model than with mixed lan- 
guage model 
Native speaker 
English 
Cantonese 
Speech 
English 
Cantonese 
Mixed 
English 
Cantonese 
Mixed 
Mixed model 
92% 
59% 
64% 
86% 
75% 
68% 
English only 
94% 
86% 
Cantonese only 
77% 
90% 
Concatenate ( xpected) 
66%(72%) 
78%(77%) 
42 
suits of our preliminary experiments, we find that ac- 
cent difference causes recognizers performance tode- 
grade. For mixed language input, we found out that 
a straight forward implementation f a mixed lan- 
guage model-based speech recognizer performs less 
well than the concatenation f pure language recog- 
uizers due to the increase in recognition candidate 
uumbers. Finally, our experimental results show 
that the Cantonese recognizer has a lower recogni- 
tion rate on the average than the English recognizer 
despite a common feature set, parameter set, and 
common algorithm. We will perform more expri- 
tnents using larger training and test sets to verify 
our results. 
References 
A. Lavie, L. Levin, A. Waibel, D. Gates, M. Gavalda, 
and L. Mayfield. 1995. JANUS: Multi-lingual 
translation of spontaneous speech in a limited do- 
main. In Proceedings of the Second Conference 
of the Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas, pages 252-255, Montreal, Quebec, Oc- 
tober. 
L. Levin, O. Glickman, Y. Qu, C. P. Rose, D. Gates, 
A. Lavie, A. Waibel, and C. Van Ess-Dykema. 
1995. Using context in machine translation of spo- 
ken language. In  Proceedings of the Sixth Interna- 
tional Conference on Theoretical and Methodologi- 
cal Issues in Machine Translation, pages 173-187, 
Leuven, Belgium, July. 
L. J. Mayfield, M. Gavalda, Y.-H. Seo, B. Suhm, 
W. Ward, and A. Waibel. 1995. Concept-based 
parsing for speech translation. In Proceedings of 
the Sizth International Conference on Theoreti- 
cal and Methodological Issues in Machine Trans- 
lation, pages 196-187, Leuven, Belgium, July. 
J. M. Vilar, A. Castellanos, J. M Jimenez, J. A. 
Sanchez, E. Vidal, J. Oneina, and H. Rulot. 1996. 
Spoken-language machine translation in limited 
domains: Can it be achieved by finite-state mod- 
els? In Proceedings of the Sixth International 
Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Is- 
sues in Machine Translation, pages 326-333, Leu- 
ven, Belgium, July. 
43 
