Expanding the Domain of a Multi-l ingual 
Speech-to-Speech Translation System 
Alon Lavie, Lori Levin, Puming Zhan, Maite Taboada, Donna Gates, 
Mirella Lapata, Cortis Clark, Matthew Broadhead, Alex Waibel 
Interactive Systems Laboratory 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
emai l  : l av ie~cs .cmu.edu 
Abstract 
JANUS is a multi-lingual speech-to-speech translation 
system, which has been designed to translate sponta- 
neous spoken language in a limited domain. In this 
paper, we describe our recent preliminary efforts to ex- 
pand the domain of coverage of the system from the 
rather limited Appointment Scheduling domain, to the 
much richer Travel Planning domain. We compare the 
two domains in terms of out-of-vocabulary rates and 
linguistic omplexity. We discuss the challenges that 
these differences impose on our translation system and 
some planned changes in the design of the system. Ini- 
tial evaluations on Travel Planning data are also pre- 
sented. 
Introduction 
Spoken language understanding systems have been rea- 
sonably successful in limited semantic domains I. The 
limited domains naturally constrain vocabulary and 
perplexity, making speech recognition tractable. In ad- 
dition, the relatively small range of meanings that could 
be conveyed make parsing and understanding tractable. 
Now, with the increasing success of large vocabulary 
continuous speech recognition (LVCSR), the challenge 
is to similarly scale up spoken language understanding. 
In this paper we describe our plans for extending the 
JANUS speech-to-speech translation system \[1\] \[2\] from 
the Appointment Scheduling domain to a broader do- 
main, Travel Planning, which has a rich sub-domain 
structure, covering many topics. 
In the last three years, the JANUS project has been 
developing a speech-to-speech translation system for 
the Appointment Scheduling domain (two people set- 
ting up a time to meet with each other). Although the 
data we have been working with is spontaneous speech, 
the scheduling scenario naturally limits the vocabulary 
to about 3000 words in English and about 4000 words in 
Spanish and German, which have more inflection. Sim- 
ilarly, the types of dialogues are naturally limited. A 
t Verbmobil, systems developed under the ATIS ini- 
tiative, and systems developed at SRI, A.T&T and 
MlT/Lincoln Lab are examples of such successful spoken 
language understanding systems. 
67 
scheduling dialogue typically consists of opening reet- 
ings, followed by several rounds of negotiation on a 
time, followed by closings. There is ambiguity, for ex- 
ample whether a number efers to a date or a time, 
but many potentially ambiguous sentences have only 
one possible meaning in the scheduling domain. To 
date, our translation system for the scheduling domain 
has achieved performance l vels on unseen data of over 
80% acceptable translations on transcribed input, and 
over 70% acceptable translations on speech input recog- 
nized with a 75-90% word accuracy, depending on the 
language. 
In addition to the scheduling domain, the JANUS 
speech recognizer has also been trained and developed 
for Switchboard, a broad domain LVCSR task. We are 
now planning to expand our domain of spoken language 
understanding aswell. The new domain, Travel Plan- 
ning, is still limited, but is significantly more complex 
than the scheduling domain. Travel Planning contains 
a number of semantic sub-domains -- for example, ac- 
commodation, events, transportation --  each of which 
has a number of sub-topics uch as time, location, and 
price. Travel planning also differs from scheduling in 
having more types of interactions. Scheduling consists 
almost entirely of negotiation dialogues except for open- 
ings and closings. The travel domain includes negoti- 
ations, information seeking, instruction giving, and di- 
alogues that accompany non-linguistic domain actions 
such as paying and reserving. Furthermore, there is 
more ambiguity in travel planning, especially because 
the same utterance can have different meanings in dif- 
ferent sub-domains. 
An important part of our approach to the travel plan- 
ning domain is a system of sub-domain parsing. Each 
sentence will be parsed in parallel by a number of sub- 
domain grammars, each of which is faster and less am- 
biguous than a large grammar would be. Since the sub- 
grammars are separated from each other, the ambigui- 
ties between them will add and not multiply. The con- 
tent of each sub-domain grammar will be determined 
automatically by running a comprehensive grammar 
over a corpus in which each sentence has a sub-domain 
tag. 
~.,~._~._.hin Source Lan~. . . .~  
I Speech "ec?g nizer \] 
GLR Translation Module 
r . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  I. f . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  : :" Morph Analyzer :.t-.P.,.. GLR" Parser 
,, f=  -- , ,  
.." Processor :.- ~ Feature Structure _,/ 
&?~?. . . ?o?  ,o? . ??? , ?? ,o?????~a 
Phoenix Translation Module 
: Int~aua ~...Frame.Siot S ructure / 
S???o??o???? 'No???"? ' ??*?  . . . . .  ~ ' t  
~ Phoenix Generator ": 
1 
Figure 1: The JANUS System 
In the remaining sections, we summarize the JANUS 
approach to spoken language translation, highlight he 
differences between the scheduling and travel planning 
domains, present some preliminary results for the travel 
planning domain, and summarize our plans for modi- 
fying the design of the system, in order to effectively 
handle a variety of sub-domains. 
Rev iew of  our  approach 
A component diagram of our system for the Scheduling 
domain can be seen in Figure 1. The main system mod- 
ules are speech recognition, parsing, discourse process- 
ing, and generation. Each module is language indepen- 
dent in the sense that it consists of a general processor 
that can be loaded with language specific knowledge 
sources. The translation system is based on an inter- 
lingua approach. The source language input string is 
first analyzed by a parser, which produces a language- 
independent interlingua content representation. The 
interlingua is then passed to a generation component, 
which produces an output string in the target language. 
In an attempt o achieve both robustness and transla- 
tion accuracy when faced with speech disfluencies and 
recognition errors, we use two different parsing strate- 
gies: a GLFt parser designed to be more accurate, and 
a Phoenix parser designed to be more robust. Detailed 
descriptions of the system components appear in our 
previous publications \[1\] \[2\] \[3\] \[4\] \[5\] \[6\]. 
68 
Speech translation in the JANUS system is guided 
by the general principle that spoken utterances can be 
analyzed and translated as a sequential collection of se- 
mantic dialogue units (SDUs), each of which roughly 
corresponds to a speech-act. SDUs are semantically co- 
herent pieces of information. The interlingua represen- 
tation in our system was designed to capture meaning 
at the level of such SDUs. Each semantic dialogue unit 
is analyzed into an interlingua representation. 
For both parsers, segmentation f an input utterance 
into SDUs is achieved in a two-stage process, partly 
prior to and partly during parsing. Pre-parsing seg- 
mentation relies on acoustic, lexical, syntactic, seman- 
tic, and statistical knowledge sources. We use a statis- 
tical measure that attempts to capture the likelihood 
of an SDU boundary between any two words of an ut- 
terance. The measure is trained on hand-segmented 
transcriptions of dialogues. Pro-parsing segmentation 
substantially reduces parsing time, increases parse ac- 
curacy, and reduces ambiguity. Final segmentation into 
SDUs is done during parse time, guided by the gram- 
mar rules. The same statistical measure used to find the 
most likely SDU boundaries during pre-parsing segmen- 
tation is used to filter out unlikely segmentations during 
parse time. 
For the scheduling domain, we have been using se- 
mantic grammars, in which the grammar ules de- 
fi,e semantic categories such as busy-free-phrase and 
schedu le -meet ing  in addition to syntactic categories 
such as NP and VP. There were several reasons for chos- 
ing semantic grammars. First, the domain lends itself 
well to semantic grammars because there are many fixed 
expressions and common expressions that are almost 
formulaic. Breaking these down syntactically would 
be an unnecessary complication. Additionally, sponta- 
neous spoken language is often syntactically ill formed, 
yet semantically coherent. Semantic grammars allow 
our robust parsers to extract the key concepts being 
conveyed, even when the input is not completely gram- 
matical in a syntactic sense. Furthermore, we wanted 
to achieve reasonable coverage of the domain in as short 
a time as possible. Our experience has been that, for 
limited domains, 60% to 80% coverage can be achieved 
in a few months with semantic grammars. 
In order to assess the overall effectiveness of the trans- 
lation system, we developed a detailed end-to-end eval- 
uation procedure \[7\]. We evaluate the translation mod- 
ules on both transcribed and speech recognized input. 
The evaluation of transcribed input allows us to assess 
how well our translation modules would function with 
"perfect" speech recognition. Testing is performed on 
a set of unseen dialogues that were not used for devel- 
oping the translation modules or training the speech 
recognizer. 
The translation of an utterance is manually evalu- 
ated by assigning it a grade or a set of grades based 
on the number of SDUs in the utterance. Each SDU 
is classified first as either relevant to the scheduling 
domain (in-domain) or not relevant o the scheduling 
domain (out-of-domain). Each SDU is then assigned 
one of four grades for translation quality: (1) Perfect 
- a fluent translation with all information conveyed; 
(2) OK - all important information translated correctly 
but some unimportant details missing, or the transla- 
tion is awkward; (3) Bad - unacceptable translation; 
(4) Recognition Error - unacceptable translation due to 
a speech recognition error. These grades are used for 
both in-domain and out-of-domain sentences. However, 
if an out-of-domain sentence is automatically detected 
as such by the parser and is not translated at all, it is 
given an "OK" grade. The evaluations are performed 
by one or more independent graders. When more than 
one grader is used, the results are averaged together. 
Comparison of Travel and Scheduling 
Domains 
In this section we compare some characteristics of the 
English Travel Domain (ETD) and the English Spon- 
taneous Scheduling Task (ESST). The ETD and ESST 
databases are not comparable in some ways - -  ETD has 
been under development for less than one year whereas 
the ESST database was collected over a three year pe- 
riod and is much larger. Also, the ESST recording sce- 
nario was push-to-talk whereas the ETD recording set- 
up allows for cross talk. However, it is possible to draw 
some comparisons. For example, speech recognition ap- 
69 
pears to indicate that the ETD domain has a higher 
out-of-vocabulary ate. In addition, informal observa- 
tions of the grammar developers point out sources of 
ambiguity in ETD that do not exist in ESST. 
ESST data was collected by giving marked-up calen- 
dars to two speakers and asking them to schedule a two 
hour meeting at a time that was free on each of their 
calendars. This method allowed us to collect speech 
in a limited domain that was nevertheless pontaneous. 
Similarly, ETD data is collected in a simulated con- 
versation between a traveller and a travel agent. The 
speaker playing the traveller is given a scenario such as 
"You are travelling with your wife and teenage daugh- 
ter to the Pittsburgh Arts Festival. Book a hotel room 
that is conveniently located." The speaker playing the 
travel agent has information about hotels, transporta- 
tion, etc. on which to base answers to the traveller's 
questions. 
The current ETD database contains 2000 utterances 
(30 dialogues). For both speech recognition and gram- 
mar development, we used 1292 utterances (20 dia- 
logues) as a training set and 368 utterances (5 dia- 
logues) as a test set. The ESST speech recognition 
training set contains over 40 hours speech data and is 
composed of 8277 utterances. The testing set is com- 
posed of 612 utterances. The ESST testing vocabulary 
contains 2900 words. The current word error rate of 
the ESST recognizer is about 23%. 
Some differences in the ETD and ESST databases are 
attributable to the push-to-talk vs. cross-talk record- 
ing scenarios. In push-to-talk dialogues, the partici- 
pants push a key when they start and finish speaking, 
and cannot  speak at the same time. In cross-talk di- 
alogues, participants can speak freely and their speech 
can overlap. The average length of ESST push-to-talk 
utterances is 33.6 words. ETD cross-talk utterances 
average 14.6 words. In addition, the noise rate (noise- 
tokens/total-tokens) is 25.3% for the ESST training set, 
and 15.23% for the travel domain training set. 
In spite of the differences in the size of the two 
databases, we can compare the out-of-vocabulary rates 
in order to get some idea of the difference in vocabulary 
sizes of the two domains. The vocabulary size of the 
ESST system is 2900 words, which includes all unique 
words in the ESST training set. The ETD speech vo- 
cabulary was constructed by augmenting the ESST vo- 
cabulary with 312 new words that appeared in the ETD 
training set. This results in a vocabulary of 3212 words. 
The ETD test set contains 272 out-of-vocabulary tokens 
out of a total of 2554 tokens. Thus, the out-of-vocabu- 
lary rate for the ETD test set is 10.65%. This compares 
with out-of-vocabulary rates for ESST that have ranged 
between 1% to 4%. We have also found noticeable lan- 
guage model perplexity differences between the ESST 
and ETD domains. However, these appear to be highly 
dependent on the method used for obtaining the lan- 
guage models, and did not seem to form a consistent 
pattern. 
There are also differences between ETD and ESST 
with respect o parsing and ambiguity. For example, in 
the scheduling domain, numbers could be either dates 
or times. In the travel domain, a number like twelve 
.fifteen could be a time, price (twelve dollars and fifteen 
cents or one thousand two hundred and fifteen dollars), 
room number, flight number, etc. The increase in in- 
terpretations can be attributed to the larger number of 
sub-domains. 
P re l iminary  Resu l ts  fo r  the  Trave l  
P lann ing  Domain  
Speech  Recogn i t ion  
Due to the very limited amount of training data avail- 
able for the travel domain, we decided to attempt o 
build a speech recognition system for ETD by a pro- 
cess of adapting the acoustic and language models of 
our ESST recognition system. To start off, we con- 
ducted a preliminary evaluation on the ETD test set 
using the original ESST acoustic and language mod- 
els. With this set-up, the average word error rate on 
the ETD test set was 55%. Next, we added the ETD 
training corpus to the ESST training corpus and used 
the merged corpus for language model training. With 
this new language model, we obtained a 42% word er- 
ror rate. We also tried to build the language model just 
based on the ETD corpus, which was smoothed by in- 
terpolation with the ESST language model. However, 
this resulted in only about 0.5% improvement. 
In the next stage, to allow for better training with 
very limited amounts of data, we rebuilt the acoustic 
models using just the PLP feature and signal energy. 
This dramatically reduced the codebook size and the 
dimension of the feature vectors. With the new acoustic 
models which were trained with ESST and ETD speech 
data, we obtained a 37.5% word error rate. Training 
the acoustic models with Vocal Tract Normalization 
(VTLN) speaker normalization reduced the word er- 
ror rate even further to 35.8%. We experimented with 
adapting the ESST acoustic models by using the ETD 
speech as adaptation data, but both the MLLR and 
MAP adaptation methods did not reduce the word er- 
ror rate any further. 
There are three main reasons why the word error rate 
is much higher for ETD than ESST. First, the out- 
of-vocabulary ate is significantly higher. Second, be- 
cause the travel domain database is very small com- 
pared to the ESST database, the ESST data domi- 
nates the acoustic and language models. Third, the 
ETD data is cross-talk, which is generally more dis- 
fluent and contains more co-articulation. (This was 
demonstrated with our Spanish Spontaneous Schedul- 
ing Task database, which contained both push-to-talk 
and cross-talk utterances.) We expect significantly 
larger amounts of training data to at least partially 
alleviate these problems resulting in significant perfor- 
mance gains. 
70 
We obtained the above results without using the ETD 
speech data to train the acoustic models. Considering 
that the travel speech data is only a very small portion 
of all the available English training data, we plan to 
use adaptation techniques to adapt the current ESST 
acoustic models into models for the travel domain. 
Translation Components 
In addition to speech recognition, we have done some 
preliminary development of our translation components 
for ETD. Since we currently have only English travel 
data, we developed English analysis and generation 
grammars for English-to-English translation (or para- 
phrase) using the Phoenix system. On a test set of 
six unseen dialogues, we achieve about 45% acceptable 
translation of transcribed SDUs in the travel domain. 2
A preliminary interlingua design for the travel do- 
main contains about 200 concepts arranged in an IS-A 
hierarchy, semantic features to represent the meaning 
of closed class items, and a list of five basic speech acts 
which each have several sub-types. We have developed 
experimental grammars that are compatible with the 
interlingua design for English parsing (Phoenix), En- 
glish generation (Phoenix and GLR), German gener- 
ation (Phoenix), and Japanese generation (Phoenix). 
Mappers mediate between Phoenix tree structures and 
the feature structures of the interlingua design. 
P lanned Mod i f i ca t ions  to  the  System 
Des ign  
We believe that the main challenge that the Travel 
Planning domain will impose on our translation system 
is the problem of how to effectively deal with signifi- 
cantly greater levels of ambiguity. We suspect hat the 
single semantic grammar approach, which we have been 
following for the scheduling domain, will not be feasible 
for the Travel domain. Syntactically similar structures 
that correspond to different semantic oncepts usually 
require separate rules in a semantic grammar. Thus, 
as the domain semantically expands, the size of the se- 
mantic grammar tends to substantially grow. With this 
growth, significant new ambiguities are introduced into 
the grammar, and these tend to multiply. 
One method of dealing with this problem is by 
"breaking" the large travel domain into several seman- 
tic sub-domains. Because ach of the sub-domains will 
be semantically much more narrow, the corresponding 
semantic grammars should be smaller and far less am- 
biguous, leading to faster parsing and more accurate 
analysis. Since the sub-grammars are separated from 
each other, the ambiguities between them will add and 
not multiply. 
2The travel domain grammars have been under develop- 
ment for only a few months. The scheduling domain gram- 
mars, which have been under development for three years 
achieve about 85% acceptable translations on unseen tran- 
scribed input. 
Travel domain dialogues, however, will often con- 
tain sub-dialogues and utterances from different sub- 
domains, and will likely shift between one sub-domain 
and another. We thus envision modifying the design of 
our translation system to facilitate dealing with multi- 
ple sub-domains simultaneously and/or in parallel. Ut- 
terances will be first segmented into sub-utterances bya 
segmentation procedure. We expect hat in most cases, 
each sub-utterance will not span multiple sub-domains. 
Each sub-utterance will then be parsed in parallel by 
a number of sub-domain grammars, each of which is 
faster and less ambiguous than a large grammar would 
be. Because each sub-domain grammar should be able 
to parse well only sentences that fall in its domain of 
coverage, we expect that in many cases it should be 
relatively easy to select which among the parses pro- 
duced by the different sub-domain grammars is most 
appropriate and/or correct. Sentences that are covered 
well by more than one grammar most likely indicate 
true semantic ambiguity (for example, as mentioned 
above, an expression such as twelve fifteen, which 
can be interpreted as a time, flight number, room num- 
ber or price). To aid in such cases, we plan on devel- 
oping a sub-domain/topic dentification and tracking 
component that will be independent of the semantic 
grammars. This component will assist in disambiguat- 
ing among semantically ambiguous analyses using con- 
textual information, modeled via statistical and other 
methods. 
The effectiveness of the sub-domain approach de- 
scribed above will most likely depend heavily on 
our ability to choose appropriate sub-domains. Sub- 
domains hould be chosen to be semantically distinct, so 
that sentences may be easily classified into sub-domains 
by both humans and machine. Our current sub-domain 
classification has two dimensions. The first distin- 
guishes between topics such as accommodation, trans- 
portation, restaurants, events and sights. The second 
distinguishes between discussions about price, reserva- 
tions, location, time, participants, directions and gen- 
eral information. We are in the process of experiment- 
ing with both possible classifications, and their com- 
binations. We have constructed a simple sub-domain 
classifier that is based on a naive-Bayesian approach 
and trained on the available ETD data. Preliminary 
tests (on unseen data) indicate that the simple classi- 
fier correctly identifies ub-domains classified according 
to the first dimension about 65% of the time. When 
the second dimension set of sub-domain classifications 
is used, the classifier correctly identifies 75% of the sub- 
domains. 
We would like to avoid having to manually construct 
the different sub-domain grammars for several reasons. 
First, even if the various sub-domains are semantically 
distinct, multiple sub-domain grammars will likely con- 
tain some of the same rules. Furthermore, since we ex- 
pect to experiment with various sub-domain classifica- 
tions, it would be useful to devise an automatic method 
71 
for dividing a large comprehensive grammar of the en- 
tire travel domain into sub-domain grammars. We plan 
to achieve this task by running a comprehensive gram- 
mar over a corpus in which each sentence is tagged with 
its corresponding sub-domain and correct parse. The 
grammar ules that correspond to the correct parse are 
then added to the appropriate sub-domain grammar. 
This approach is similar to one proposed by Rayner 
and Samuelsson \[8\] for tailoring a large grammar to a 
given corpus. 
Conclusions 
In this paper we described our plans for extending the 
JANUS speech-to-speech translation system from the 
Appointment Scheduling domain to a broader domain, 
Travel Planning, which has a rich sub-domain struc- 
ture. Our preliminary experiments with English travel 
domain data indicate that it is characterized by higher 
out-of-vocabulary ates and greater levels of semantic 
complexity, compared with English scheduling domain 
data. In order to effectively deal with the significantly 
greater levels of ambiguity, we plan to use a collection of 
sub-domain grammars, which will in sum cover the en- 
tire travel planning domain. Our system design will be 
modified to facilitate working with multiple sub-domain 
grammars in parallel. The collection of appropriate 
sub-domains will be determined empirically. Automatic 
pruning methods will be used to derive each of the sub- 
domain grammars from a manually constructed com- 
prehensive grammar. We expect o complete an initial 
prototype implementation of the above methods and 
have additional preliminary evaluations of their effec- 
tiveness by late summer 1997. 
Acknowledgements  
The work reported in this paper was funded in part 
by grants from ATR- Interpreting Telecommunications 
Research Laboratories of Japan, the US Department 
of Defense, and the Verbmobil Project of the Federal 
Republic of Germany. 
References  
\[1\] A. Lavie, D. Gates, M. Gavald?, L. Mayfield, 
A. Waibel, and L. Levin. Multi-lingual transla- 
tion of spontaneously spoken language in a limited 
domain. In Proceedings of the COLING, 1996. 
\[2\] Alon Lavie, Alex Waibel, Lori Levin, Donna 
Gates, Marsal Gavalda, Torsten Zeppenfeld, Pum- 
ing Zhan and Oren Glickman. Translation of Con- 
versational Speech with JANUS-II, In Proceedings 
of ICSLP-96, Philadelphia, USA, October 1996. 
\[3\] P. Zhan, K. Ries, M. Gavalda, D. Gates, A. 
Lavie and A. Waibel. JANUS-II: Towards Sponta- 
neous Spanish Speech Recognition, Proceedings of 
ICSLP-96, Philadelphia, PA, October 1996 
\[4\] A. Lavie. A Grammar Based Robust Parser For 
Spontaneous Speech. PhD thesis, School of Com- 
puter Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 1995. 
\[5\] L. Mayfield, M. Gavaldk, Y-H. Seo, B. Suhm. W. 
Ward. A. Waibel. Parsing Real Input in JANUS: a 
Concept-Based Approach, In Proceedings of TMI 
95. 
\[6\] Y. Qu, C. P. Rose, B. Di Eugenio. Using Discourse 
Predictions for Ambiguity Resolution, In Proceed- 
ings of COLING-96, Copenhagen, Denmark, Au- 
gust 1996. 
\[7\] D. Gates, A. Lavie, L. Levin, A. Waibel, 
M. Gavaldk, L. Mayfield, M. Woszczyna and 
P. Zhan. End-to-end Evaluation in JANUS: a 
Speech-to-speech Translation System, To appear in 
Proceedings of ECAI Workshop on Dialogue Pro- 
cessing in Spoken Language Systems, Budapest, 
Hungary, August 1996. 
\[8\] M-S. Agn~, H. Alshawi, I. Bretan, D. Carter, 
K. Ceder, M. Collins, R. Crouch, V. Digalakis, 
B. Ekholm, B. Gamback, J. Kaja, J. Karlgren, 
B. Lyberg, P. Price, S. Pulman, M. Rayner, 
C. Samuelsson, and T. Svensson. Spoken Language 
Translator: First-Year Report. Technical Report 
CRC-043, SRI Cambridge, 1994. 
72 
