Analysis of a Hand-Tagging Task 
Chr i s t iane  Fe l lbaum*t ,  Joach im Grabowsk i~,  Shar i  Landes*  
*Cognitive Science Laboratory  
Pr inceton University 
tR ider  University 
:~Department of Psychology 
University of Mannheim, Germany 
Abst rac t  
We analyze the results of a semantic an- 
notation task performed by novice taggers 
as part of the WordNet SemCor project 
(Landes et al, in press). Each polysemous 
content word in a text was matched to a 
sense from WordNet. Comparing the per- 
formance of the novice taggers with that 
of experienced lexicographers, we find that 
the degree of polysemy, part of speech, and 
the position within the WordNet entry of 
the target words played a role in the tag- 
gers' choices. The taggers agreed on a sense 
choice more often than they agreed with 
two lexicographers, suggesting an effect of 
experience on sense distinction. Evidence 
indicates that taggers selecting senses from 
a list ordered by frequency of occurrence, 
where salient, core senses are found at the 
beginning of the entry, use a different strat- 
egy than taggers working with a randomly 
ordered list of senses. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Our present understanding of how the meanings of 
polysemous words are represented in speakers' minds 
and accessed uring language use is poor. One 
model of the mental lexicon, implicit in much of 
computational linguistics, likens it to a dictionary, 
with a discrete entry for each word form and each 
sense of a polysemous word form. Language produc- 
tion and comprehension then would simply require 
"looking up" the appropriate entry and selecting the 
intended meaning. If this model of the mental exi- 
con, with its discrete and non-overlapping sense rep- 
resentations, were correct, both the creation and the 
use of dictionaries would be straightforward. 
Lexicographers collect large numbers of occur- 
rences of words from a corpus. Interpreting the dif- 
34 
ferent meanings of polysemous words from the cor- 
pus presents no dit~culty, since lexicographers sim- 
ply do what they do as competent speakers of the 
language. The step that is particular to lexicogra- 
phy is transforming the corpus occurrences ofa given 
word form into a number of discrete senses in the 
format of dictionary entries. Cross-dictionary com- 
parisons how that carving up the different meanings 
of a polysemous word into discrete dictionary senses 
is difficult. The number of senses for a polysemous 
word often differs, reflecting "lumping" versus "split- 
ting" strategies; some senses are absent from one 
but not another dictionary. Yet postulating different 
mental exicons eems unwarranted, given our rapid 
and successful communication. Rather, the mapping 
process from occurrence to dictionary entry may give 
rise to difficulties and discrepancies across dictionar- 
ies because speakers' meaning representations may 
not resemble those of dictionaries with their fiat and 
discrete senses, thus making lexicography an artifi- 
cial and therefore challenging task. 
Semantic tagging is the inverse of lexicography, in
that taggers identify and interpret dictionary entries 
with respect o words occurring in a text. Taggers, 
like lexicographers, first interpret the target word in 
the text, and then match the meaning they have 
identified for a given occurrence of a polysemous 
word with one of several dictionary senses. Our goal 
was to examine the difficulties associated with se- 
mantic tagging. Because taggers are faced with the 
same task as lexicographers-although the the for- 
mer select, rather than create, dictionary senses to 
match word occurrences in text-we expected to see 
discrepancies among the results of the semantic an- 
notation task across taggers. Moreover, we guessed 
that those polysemous words that receive very dif- 
ferent treatments across dictionaries would also be 
tagged differently by the annotators. 
m 
n 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
mm 
m 
m 
2 Sources of  diff icult ies in a 
semantic annotation task 
We predicted that three properties of the words that 
were to be matched with specific WordNet senses 
would result in differences among the individual tag- 
gers' annotations and between those of the taggers 
and the more experienced lexicographers. These 
variables are: the degree of polysemy, the part of 
speech, and the position within the dictionary entry 
of the words. 
3 Polysemy 
Arguably, the degree of polysemy of a word is related 
to the degree of difficulty of the tagging process. The 
fact that dictionaries differ frequently with respect 
to the number of senses for polysemous words points 
to the difficulty of representing different meanings of 
a word as discrete and non-overlapping sense distinc- 
tions. In some cases (homonymy), the division be- 
tween different senses seems fairly clear and agreed 
upon among different lexicographers, while for oth- 
ers, it is not at all obvious how many senses should 
be distinguished. 
4 Number  of senses in WordNet  
The dictionary that the taggers had available for tag- 
ging task is WordNet (Miller, 1990; Miller and Fell- 
baum, 1991). WordNet makes fairly fine-grained dis- 
tinctions, roughly comparable to a collegiate dictio- 
nary. We reasoned that the greater the sense number 
in WordNet was, the harder the taggers' task of eval- 
uating the different sense distinctions in terms of the 
target word became. We predicted that a greater de- 
gree of polysemy would lead to greater discrepancies 
between the taggers' matches and those of the exper- 
hnenters, as well as among the taggers themselves. I 
5 Part of speech 
The semantic make-up of some words makes them 
more difScult to interpret, and hence harder to 
match to dictionary senses, than others. Some con- 
cepts are less well-defined or definable, and more ab- 
stract than others (Schwanenfluegel, 1991). Words 
referring to concrete and imagible ntities uch as 
objects and persons may generally be easier to in- 
terpret. If such words are polysemous, the different 
meanings should be relatively easy to distinguish on 
"Polysemy" in WordNet subsumes homonymy as 
well as polysemy; however, the latter is far more com- 
mon: in most cases, the different senses of a word are 
semantically related. No clearly discernible homonyms 
occurred in the data we analyzed for this report. 
35 
the grounds that each meaning has a fairly clear rep- 
resentation. By this reasoning, we expected nouns 
to present fewer difficulties to taggers. (Of course, 
many nouns have abstract referents, but as a class, 
we predicted nouns to be easier to annotate than 
verbs or modifiers. The nouns in the text we chose 
for our analysis had mostly concrete, imagible refer- 
ents.) 
Modifiers like adjectives and adverbs often de- 
rive much of their meanings in particular contexts 
from the words they modify ((Katz, 1964; Puste- 
jovsky, 1995)). During sequential tagging, each con- 
tent word in a running text is tagged, so the mean- 
ings of highly polysemous adjectives often become 
clear as the tagger looks to the head noun. How- 
ever, adjectives in WordNet are highly polysemous 
and show a good deal of overlap, so that the context 
does not always uniquely pick out one sense. The 
kinds of polysemy and overlap found among the ad- 
jectives are carried over to the many derived adverbs 
in WordNet. 
Whereas the meanings of nouns tend to be stable 
in the presence of different verbs, verbs can show 
subtle meaning variations depending on the kinds of 
noun arguments with which they co-occur. More- 
over, the boundary between literal and metaphoric 
language seems particularly elusive in the case of 
verbs. (Gentner and France, 1988) demonstrated the 
"high mutability" of verbs, showing people's willing- 
ness to assign very flexible meanings to verbs while 
noun meanings were held constant. They argue that 
verb meanings are more easily altered because they 
are less cohesive than those of nouns. We expected 
the semantic flexibility of verbs to create additional 
difBculties for tagging. Discrete dictionary senses 
could be particularly iU-suited to usages where core 
senses have been extended beyond what the dictio- 
nary definitions cover, and where taggers must ab- 
stract from a creative usage to a more general, inclu- 
sive sense. In other cases, a usage can be assigned 
to several senses that have been accorded polyseme 
status on the basis of previously encountered usages, 
but may overlap with respect o other usages. We 
therefore xpected less overall agreement for verbs 
tags than for nouns. 
Polysemy and syntactic lass membership nter- 
act: Verbs and adjectives have on average more 
senses than nouns in both conventional dictionar- 
ies and in WordNet. Both the number of senses and 
the syntactic lass membership of verbs and modi- 
tiers may conspire to make these words more difficult 
to tag. 
6 Sense  order ing  in Vv~rdNet  
The order in which WordNet list.,~ the different senses 
of a word corresponds to the frequency with which 
that sense has been tagged to words in the Brown 
Corpus (Landes et al, in press). Statistically, one 
would therefore xpect he first sense to be the one 
that is chosen as the most appropriate one in most 
cases. (Gale et al, 1992) estimate that automatic 
sense disambignation would be a'~, least 75% correct if 
a system ignored context and assigned the most fre- 
quently occurring sense. (Miller et al, 1994) found 
that automatic assignment of polysemous words in 
the Brown Corpus to senses in WordNet was correct 
58% of the time with a guessing heuristic that as- 
sumed the most frequently occurring sense to be the 
correct one. 
The taggers whose work is analyzed here were not 
aware of the frequency ordering of the senses. How- 
ever, other reasons led us to predict a preference for 
the first sense. The most frequently tagged sense 
also usually represents he most "central" or "core" 
meening of the word in question. When it covers 
the largest semantic "territory," the first sense may 
seem like the safest choice. 
Taggers may often be reluctant to ex~mlne a large 
number of senses when one appears quite appropri- 
ate. While reading each new WordNet entry for a 
given word, taggers must modify the corresponding 
entry in their mental lexicons. When encountering 
a sense that appears to match the usage, taggers do 
not know whether another sense, which they have 
not yet read, will present a still more subtle mean- 
ing difference. Since the first sense usually repre- 
sents the most inclusive meaning of the word, tag- 
gers daunted by the task of examining a large num- 
ber of closely related senses or unsure about cer- 
tain sense distinctions may simply chose the first 
sense rather than continue searching for further sub- 
differentiations. We therefore predicted a tendency 
on the part of the taggers to select he first sense 
even when it was not the one chosen by us. 
7 The  exper iment  
We analyzed the data from the paid training ses- 
sion that all taggers underwent before they were as- 
signed to work on the semantic oncordance (cite 
landesinpress). The taggers were 17 undergraduate 
and graduate students (6 male, 11 female). In all 
cases, the taggers' ense selections were compared to 
those made by two of the authors, who have years 
of experience in lexicography. While these "expert" 
sense selections constituted the standard for evaluat- 
ing the taggers' performance, they should not be re- 
36 
garded as the "right" choice, implying that all other 
choices are "wrong." Rather, the matches between 
taggers' and experts' choices reflect the extent o 
which the ability to match mental representations 
of meanings with dictionary entries overlap between 
untrained annotators and lexicographers practiced 
in drawing subtle sense distinctions and familiar 
with the limitations of dictionary representations. 
In addition to evaluating the taggers' annotations 
against those of the "experts," we examined the de- 
gree of inter-tagger agreement, which would shed 
some light on the representation f meanings in the 
lexicons of novice taggers unpracticed at drawing a 
large number of fine-grained sense distinctions, and 
their ability to deal with potentially overlapping and 
redundant entries in WordNet. A high inter-tagger 
agreement rate would be indicative of the stabil- 
ity of naive inter-subject meaning discrimination. 
We expected less agreement for words that we pre- 
dicted to be more difficult. Significant disagreement 
for highly polysemous words would be compatible 
with (Jorgenson, 1990), whose subjects discriminate 
only about hree senses of highly polysemous nouns. 
Moreover, we expected less inter-tagger agreement 
for verbs and modifiers than for nouns. 
The material was a 660-word section taken from a 
fiction passage in the Brown Corpus. We eliminated 
the 336 function words and proper nouns, and the 70 
monosemons content words. Of the remaining 254 
polysemous words, 88 were nouns, 100 were verbs, 39 
were adjectives, and 27 were adverbs, adistribution 
similar to that found in standard prose texts. The 
task of the taggers was to select appropriate senses 
from WordNet for these 254 words. 2
The number of alternative WordNet senses per 
word ranged from two to forty-one (the mean across 
all POS was 6.62). The mean number of WordNet 
senses for the verbs in the text was 8.63; for adjec- 
tives 7.95; for nouns 4.74; for adverbs 3.37. 
Taggers received a specially created booklet with 
the typed text and a box in which they marked their 
sense choices. 3 
Taggers further eceived a dictionary booklet con- 
taining the senses for the words to be tagged as they 
are represented in WordNet. Word senses were pro- 
vided as synonym sets along with defining losses. 
For nouns and verbs, the corresponding superordi- 
nate synonym sets were presented; adjectives were 
2We had made a few minor alterations to the text; 
for example, we omitted short phrases containing word 
senses that had previously occurred in the text. 
3In addition, the taggers participants indicated the 
degree of confidence with which they made their choice; 
these ratings are reported in (Fellbaum et al, in press). 
given with their antonyms. Two versions of the dic- 
tionary booklet were prepared, one for each training 
condition. 
In the first condition ("frequency" condition), 8 
taggers were given a dictionary booklet listing the 
WordNet senses in the order of frequency with which 
they appear in the already tagged Brown Corpus. If, 
in the frequency condition, there was a significant 
tendency to chose the first sense, which was usually 
also the most inclusive, general one, it would indi- 
cate that the taggers adopted a "safe" strategy in 
picking the core sense rather than to continue search- 
ing for more subtle distinctions. While the taggers 
were not told anything about the sense ordering in 
the dictionary booklet, we expected those taggers 
working in the frequency condition to realize fairly 
quickly in the course of their annotations that the 
sense listed at the top was often most inclusive or 
salient one. 
In the second condition ("random order condi- 
tion"), the remaining 9 taggers were given a dic- 
tionary booklet with the same WordNet senses ar- 
ranged in random order generated by means of a 
random number generator. Here, the first sense was 
no longer necessarily the most inclusive, general one. 
A strong tendency towards picking the first sense in 
the random order would point to a reluctance to ex- 
amine and evaluate all available senses, independent 
of whether this sense represented the most salient or 
core sense. 
Not surprisingly, the expert choice was at the top 
of the list in the frequency condition for most words. 
The mean position of the expert choice for all parts 
of speech in the frequency order was 2.29; in the 
random condition, the mean position of the expert 
choice was 3.55. 
The taggers, who worked independently from each 
other, were not aware of having been assigned to one 
of two groups of participants. They finished the task 
within 4-6 hours. 
8 Resul ts  
We first report the percentage of overlap between 
taggers' and experts' choices in terms of the three 
main variables: POS, degree of polysemy, and the 
order of senses in WordNet. We give the results in 
percentages here; however, calculation of the signif- 
icant effects is based on analyses of variance carried 
out on the raw data. 
In the frequency condition, taggers overall chose 
the same sense as the experts 75.2% of the time; 
in the random condition, the overall agreement was 
72.8%. In both conditions, performance was signifi- 
cantly (p < 0.01) higher for nouns than for the other 
37 
parts of speech. For all four parts of speech, we 
found more tagger-expert matches in the frequency 
condition than in the random condition. The dif- 
ference, however, was significant (p < 0.05) only for 
nouns. 
The target words were classified into four groups 
depending on their polysemy count. Group 1 con- 
talned words with 2 senses; Group 2 words with 3-4 
senses; the words in Group 3 had 5-7, and in Group 
4, 8 or more senses. The groups were created so that 
each contained approximately 25% of the words from 
each part of speech, i.e., the groups were similar in 
size for each syntactic ategory. 
Tagger-expert matches decreased significantly 
with increasing number of senses (p<0.01) in both 
conditions. This effect was found for all parts of 
speech, but it was especially strong for adverbs, 
where performance dropped from a mean 83.3% 
tagger-expert agreement for adverbs with two senses 
to 32.5% for adverbs with 5-7 senses, and to only 
29.4% for the most polysemous adverbs. Except for 
words with two senses, we found more tagger-expert 
matches in the frequency condition than in the ran- 
dom condition. 
In both conditions, significantly more tagger- 
expert matches occurred for all parts of speech when 
the expert choice was in first position than when it 
occurred in a subsequent position (80.2% vs. 70.5%, 
p<0.01 for the frequency condition; 79% vs. 70%, 
p<0.05 for the random condition). This effect was 
also found with the same level of significance for 
verbs alone, in both conditions. In the frequency 
condition, we found the effect of the expert choice 
being at the top of the list of senses to be particularly 
strong for the most polysemons words (p<0.05); the 
overall effect of the expert choice being the first 
choice for all polysemy classes was significant at the 
p<0.01 level. (For words with only two senses in 
WordNet, the position had no significant effect on 
the rate of agreement between taggers and experts.) 
We now turn to the sense choices that were made 
by most taggers. We asked, what percentage oftag- 
gers selected the most frequently chosen sense, and 
did the syntactic lass membership of the words, 
their degree of polysemy, or the order of the senses 
in WordNet have an effect on the rate of agreement? 
Taggers agreed among themselves significantly 
more often than they did with the experts (82.5% 
in the frequency condition, and 82% in the ran- 
dom condition). Inter-tagger agreement followed the 
same pattern as tagger-expert matches: agreement 
decreased with increasing polysemy; agreement rates 
were highest for nouns and lowest for verbs and ad- 
jectives in both conditions. 
Inter-tagger agreement decreased significantly 
(p<~0.01) with increasing polysemy for all parts of 
speech in both conditions. This supports our expec- 
tation that more choices render the matching task 
more dii~cult, making agreement less likely. The 
decrease in inter-tagger agreement with increasing 
polysemy was especially strong in the case of ad- 
verbs. 
In the frequency order condition, the overall agree- 
ment was significantly (p<~0.01) higher (87%) when 
the agreed-upon sense was the first choice rather 
than a subsequent one (78%) on the list of alter- 
native senses in the dictionary. This effect was also 
found separately for all POS except nouns. Simi- 
larly, we found that in the random order condition, 
inter-tagger agreement was higher for all POS when 
the agreed-upon sense was the first in the dictio- 
nary (85.5% vs. 79.6%). For the different polysemy 
groups, the choice most often made was in first posi- 
tion for low and medium high polysemy words, but 
for high polysemy words (5 or more senses), the most 
frequently selected sense was less often in the first 
position. 
9 D iscuss ion  
The rather high tagger-expert agreement indicated 
that the novice taggers found the annotation task 
feasible. We found the predicted main effects for 
degree of polysemy, POS, and the order in which 
the senses were presented in the dictionary booklet. 
Increasing polysemy of the target words produced 
less tagger-expert and inter-tagger agreement. Be- 
sides having to weigh and compare more options, 
the taggers needed to adjust their own ideas of the 
polysemous words' meanings to the particular way 
these are split up and represented in WordNet. The 
more alternative senses there were, the less likeli- 
hood there was that the taggers' mental represen- 
tations of the senses overlapped significantly with 
those in WordNet. 
In both conditions, nouns were tagged signifi- 
cantly more often in agreement with the experts' 
choice than verbs and adjectives. For nouns, we 
found no significant increase in the number of 
agreed-upon choices when they were at the top of the 
list of alternative senses, indicating that the taggers 
were fairly sure of their choices independent of the 
order in which the different noun senses were listed 
in the dictionary. This effect could be attributed 
at best only partly to the relatively low polysemy 
of nouns. Nouns may be "easier" because they com- 
monly denote concrete, imagible referents. Verb and 
adjective meanings, on the other hand, are more 
context-dependent, particularly on the meanings of 
38 
the nouns with which they co-occur. People's men- 
tal representations of noun concepts may be more 
fixed and stable and less vague than those of verbs 
and adjectives. In fact, the larger number of dic- 
tionary sense numbers for verbs in particular may 
be due less to actual meaning distinctions than to 
the lexicographer's attempt to account for the great 
semantic flexibility of many verbs. 
Overall, taggers chose the expert selection less fre- 
quently than they agreed on a sense among them- 
selves. While it is possible that the expert choice did 
not always reflect the best match, we suspect hat 
novice taggers annotate differently from lexicogra- 
phers. The latter are necessarily highly sensitive 
to sense distinctions and have developed a facility 
to retrieve and distinguish the multiple meanings of 
a word more easily than naive languge users, who 
may have a less rich representation f word mean- 
ings at their fingertips. This possibility is supported 
by (Jorgenson, 1990), whose naive subjects consis- 
tently distinguished fewer senses of a word than dic- 
tionaries do, even when they were given dictionaries 
to consult in the course of the sense discrimination 
task. Jorgenson's subjects agreed substantically on 
discriminating the three most central, salient senses 
of polysemous nouns but did not distinguish sub- 
senses. Dictionaries likewise often agree among each 
other on the most central, core, senses of words but 
differ in the number and kinds of subtle distinctions. 
But whereas lexicographers are trained in drawing 
fine distinctions, naive language users appear to be 
aware of large-grained sense differences only. Our re- 
suits indicate, in the case of finer sense distinctions, a 
lack of shared mental representations among the tag- 
gers, and a decrease in agreement. This explanation 
is also consistent with the decrease in tagger-expert 
matches along with increasing polysemy. 
The salience and the shared mental representa- 
tion of certain word senses might further account 
for our third main effect. Taggers agreed with the 
experts and with each other significantly more often 
when the WordNet senses were presented in the or- 
der of frequency of occurrence. This was generally 
true for words from all polysemy groups and POS. 
We suggest that taggers recognized the most appro- 
priate sense more easily in this condition because 
they did not use the same strategy as in the ran- 
dom order condition. In the frequency condition, the 
most salient, "core," senses usually occurred first, 
or at least fairly high, on the list of senses. These 
senses also had a high chance of being the appro- 
priam ones in the text, since we had selected a fic- 
tion passage with non-technlcal, everyday language. 
Taggers working in the frequency condition proba- 
bly realized that the sense ordering resembled that of 
most standard dictionaries and chose the first sense 
that seemed at all to be a good match rather than 
examining all senses carefully, as they would have to 
do in the random order condition. 
When the first sense was also the one the lexi- 
cographers had chosen as the most appropriate one, 
the taggers' task was relatively easy. Given that 
they recognized that the first sense was appropriate, 
selecting it meant that they did not have to exam- 
ine and compare the remaining senses in search of 
an even better choice. Weighing all available senses 
against each other and against the given usage can 
be a difficult task especially for novice taggers, and 
we expected a general tendency to gravitate towards 
the first choice for this reason. Stopping to read af- 
ter one has encountered the first sense that seems 
appropriate resembles the dictionary look-up strat- 
egy where one stops reading the entry when one has 
found a sense that seems to match the given usage 
(Kflgarriif, 1993). 
The first senses in the frequency condition, which 
generally express the most salient and central mean- 
ings, might be most clearly representend in both 
naive and expert speakers' mental lexicons and 
might show the greatest overlap across speakers. 
These senses were presumably easily understood by 
the taggers and increased any reluctance to examine 
the remaining options. 
The difference between the tagger-expert matches 
for words in the first position and words in subse- 
quent positions was particularly strong for verbs and 
(in the frequency order condition) for words with 
eight or more senses. These were the cases that were 
generally more difficult for the taggers, as reflected 
in lower tagger-expert agreement. The results there- 
fore indicate that the expert choice being the first 
made the decision process for the taggers much eas- 
ier by eliminating the need for a difficult comparison 
of all the available senses, and, in the frequency con- 
dition, by the fact that the first sense was generally 
the most salient one. 
The preference for the first among the available 
senses was even more pronounced in the inter-tagger 
agreement. There was a highly significant difference 
for the agreed-upon choice between the first and sub- 
sequent positions in the case of verbs and adjectives 
and words with eight or more senses in the frequency 
order condition (p<0.01). Again, the taggers prob- 
ably understood the first, most frequent and often 
most salient sense easily and were reluctant to con- 
sider more fine-grained sense differentiations. 
In the random order condition, no bias towards 
the first sense xisted, so the strategy of choosing the 
39 
first sense or an appropriate s nse near the top of the 
list was not available. The taggers had to examine 
and consider each sense in the entry, which made 
the task more difficult. This is reflected in lower 
inter-tagger and tagger-expert agreement rates. Yet 
the high percentages of matches in this condition 
show that the taggers worked well. When the expert 
sense was the first on the list, taggers working in the 
random order condition selected the expert sense less 
frequently than the taggers working in the frequency 
order condition. This result further indicates that 
taggers here were not biased towards the first sense, 
but considered all senses equally. 
In sum, we found that matching word usages to 
word senses in a dictionary is a hard task, whose 
dit~culty depends on the part of speech of the target 
word and increases with the number of senses given 
in the dictionary. Among the available choices, the 
first sense of each polysemous word was a significant 
attractor. 
Our findings uggest that randomly ordered senses 
would weaken taggers' strategy of relying on the 
first sense being the best match and encourage more 
scrupulous examination of the available choices. 4 
Confidence ratings reflected the degree of difficulty 
of the items in that they paralleled the taggers' per- 
formance as measured by tagger-expert and inter- 
tagger agreement. Highly polysemous words were 
tagged with less confidence, and taggers were more 
confident when tagging nouns rather than verbs and 
modifiers. Confidence was slightly higher for inter- 
tagger than expert-tagger matches, upporting the 
reality of a "naive" lexicon as opposed to represen- 
tation of polysemous words in the mental lexicon of 
practiced lexicographers or linguists. In the random 
order condition, taggers made their decision with 
more confidence than in the frequency order condi- 
tion, although was less agreement with the experts. 
We believe that this result further supports the claim 
that taggers in the two conditions proceeded differ- 
ently: Taggers working with a randomly ordered list 
of senses did not rely on the first sense being the 
correct one. They worked more scrupulously, which 
is reflected in the higher confidence ratings. 
References 
C. Fellbaum, J. Grabowski, and S. Landes. in press. 
Confidence and performance. In C. Fellbaum, ed- 
itor, Word\]Vet: An Electronic Lexical Database. 
MIT Press. 
4(Fellbaum et al, in press) report he confidence rat- 
ings of the taggers for their choices. 
W. Gale, K. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. Es- 
timating upper and lower bounds on the perfor- 
mance of word-sense disambiguation program~. In 
Proceedings of 30th Annual Meeting of the Asso- 
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 249- 
256. 
D. Gentner and I. Prance. 1988. The verb mutability 
effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of 
nouns and verbs. In S. Small, G. Cottrell, and 
Tanenhaus, editors, Lexical .Ambiguity Resolution. 
Morgan Kaufm_~nn. 
3. Jorgenson. 1990. The psycholinguistic reality 
of word senses. Journal of Psycholinguistic Re- 
search, 19:167-190. 
J. J. Katz. 1964. Semantic theory and the meaning 
of "good". Journal of Philosophy, 61:739-766. 
A. Kilgarriff. 1993. Dictionary word sense distinc- 
tions: An enquiry into their nature. Computers 
and the Humanities, 26:365-387. 
S. Landes, C. Leacock, and R. Tengi. in press. 
Building semantic oncordances. In C. Fellbaum, 
editor, WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. 
G. A. Miller and C. Fellbaum. 1991. Semantic net- 
works of english. Cognition, 41. 
G. A. Miller, M. Chodorow, S. Landes, C. Leacock, 
and R. Thomas. 1994. Using a semantic concor- 
dance for sense identification. In Proceedings of 
the Human Language Technology Workshop, ages 
240-243. Morgan Ka~frn~-n. 
G. A. Miller. 1990. Wordnet: An on-line lexical 
database. International Journal of Lexicography, 
3(4). 
J. Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. MIT 
Press. 
P. Schwanenfluegel. 1991. Why are abstract con- 
cepts hard to understand? In P. Schwanenfluegel, 
editor, The Psychology of Word Meaning. Erl- 
baum. 
40 
