A Robust Dialogue System with Spontaneous Speech 
Understanding and Cooperative Response 
Toshihiko ITOH, Akihiro DENDA,  Satoru KOGURE and Seiichi NAKAGAWA 
Department  of Informat ion and Computer  Sciences 
Toyohashi  University of Technology 
Tenpaku-cho, Toyohashi-shi, Aichi-ken, 441, Japan  
E-mail  address ? {itoh, akihiro, kogure, nakagawa}@slp.tut ics.tut .ac. jp 
1 Introduction 
A spoken dialogue system that can understand spon- 
taneous peech needs to handle extensive range of 
speech in comparision with the read speech that has 
been studied so far. The spoken language has looser 
restriction of the grammar than the written language 
and has ambiguous phenomena such as interjections, 
ellipses, inversions, repairs, unknown words and so 
on. It must be noted that the recognition rate of the 
speech recognizer is limited by the trade-off between 
the looseness of linguistic constraints and recogni- 
tion precision , and that the recognizer may out- 
put a sentence as recognition results which human 
would never say. Therefore, the interpreter that re- 
ceives recognized sentences must cope not only with 
spontaneous sentences but also with illegal sentences 
having recognition errors. Some spoken language 
systems focus on robust matching to handle ungram- 
matical utterances and illegal sentences. 
The Template Matcher (TM) at the Stanford Re- 
search Institute (Jackson et al, 91) instantiates com- 
peting templates, each of which seeks to fill its slots 
with appropriate words and phrases from the utter- 
ance. The template with the highest score yields the 
semantic representation. Carnegie Mellon Univer~ 
sity's Phoenix (Ward and Young, 93) uses Recursive 
Transition Network formalism; word patterns corre- 
spond to semantic tokens, some of which appear as 
slots in frame structures. The system fills slots in 
different frames in parallel, using a form of dynamic 
programming beam search. The score for frame is 
the number of input words it accounts for. 
Recently many multi-modal systems, which com- 
bine speech with touch screen, have been developed. 
For example, Tell and Bellik developed the tool for 
drawing coloured geometric objects on a computer 
display using speech, tactile and a mouse (Tell and 
Bellik, 91). We also developed a multi-modal dia- 
logue system based on the robust spoken dialogue 
system. 
In Section 2, we present an overview of our spo- 
ken dialogue system through multi-modalities. In 
Section 3, we describe the robust interpreter f om 
errorful speech recognition results and illegal sen- 
tences, and in Section 4, we describe the coopera- 
tive response generator. In Section 5, we show the 
results of the evaluation experiments. 
2 A Mu l t i -Moda l  D ia logue  System 
The domain of our dialogue system is "Mt. Fuji 
sightseeing uidance (the vocabulary size is 292 
words for the recognizer and 948 words for the inter- 
preter, and the test-set word perplexity is 103)", The 
dialogue system is composed of 4 parts: Input by 
speech recognizer and touch screen, graphical user 
interface, interpreter, and response generator. The 
latter two parts are described in Sections 3 and 4. 
2.1 Spontaneous Speech Recognizer 
The speech recognizer uses a frame-synchronous ne
pass Viterbi algorithm and Earley like parser for 
context-free grammar, while using HMMs as sylla- 
ble units. Input speech is analyzed by the following 
conditions : 
Sampling frequency : 
Hamming window size : 
Frame period :
LPC analysis : 
Feature parameter : 
12kHz 
21.33ms 
(256 samples) 
8ms 
14th order 
10 LPC Mel-cepstram coefficients 
and regression coefficients (ACEP) 
The acoustic models consist of 113 syllable based 
HMMs, which have 5 states, 4 Gaussian densities 
and 4 discrete duration distributions. The speaker- 
independent HMMs were adapted to the test speaker 
using 20 utterances for the adaptation. The gram- 
mar used in our speech recognizer is represented bya 
context-free grammar which describes the syntactic 
and semantic information. 
Our recognizer integrates the acoustic process 
with linguistic process directly without the phrase 
or word lattice. We could say that this architec- 
ture is better for not only cooperatively read speech 
but spontaneous speech rather than hierarchical r- 
chitectures interleaved with phrase lattice (Kai and 
Nakagawa, 95). Furthermore, the recognizer pro- 
cesses interjections and restarts based on an un- 
known word processing technique. The unknown 
word processing part uses HMM's likelihood scores 
for arbitrary syllable sequences. 
A context free grammar is made to be able to 
accept sentences with omitted post-positions and 
inversion of word in order to recognize sponta- 
neous peech. We assume that the interjections and 
57 
restarts occur at the phrase boundaries. Thus, our 
speech recognizer for read speech was improved to 
deal with spontaneous speech. 
2.2 Touch screen (pointing device) 
The touch panel used here is an electrostatic type 
produced by Nissya International System Inc. and 
the resolution is 1024 x 1024 points. This panel is 
attached on the 21 inch display of SPARC-10, which 
has coordinate axes of 1152 x 900 and a transmission 
speed of 180 points/sec. 
The input by touch screen is used to designate the 
location of map around Mt.Fuji (which is a main lo- 
cation related to our task) on the display or to select 
the desired item from the menu which consists of 
the set of items responded by a speech synthesizer. 
The response through the speech synthesizer is con- 
venient, however, user cannot memorize the content 
when the content includes many items. Therefore, 
we use the display output (map and menu) as well as 
speech synthesis for the response. User can only use 
the positioning/selecting put and speech input at 
the same time. For example, user can utter "Is here 
... ~" while positioning the location or menu. In 
this case, system regard the demonstartive "here'as 
a keyword that user has positioned/selected. 
2.3 Graphical User Interface 
On man-machine communication, user wants to 
know his or machine situation what information 
he gets from the dialogue or how machine inter- 
prets/understands hi utterances, as well as the 
speech recognition result. Therefore our system dis- 
plays the history of dialogue. This function helps 
to eliminate user uneasiness. Figure 1 illustrates an 
example of map, menu and history. A multi-modal 
response algorithm is very simple, because the sys- 
tem is sure to respond to user through speech synthe- 
sizer and if the system is possible to respond through 
graphical information, the system does use these. 
Figure 1: An Example of Map, Menu, and History 
for an Input Utterance 
( Input : How much is the entrance fee for Fujikyu- 
Highland ? ) 
58 
I- 
"E 1 
?D 
o~ 
& 
o= 
1 on synthesized voice 
Figure 2: Spoken Dialogue System 
The  In terpreter  
Processing illegal Utterances 
3 
3.1 
Whole process is carried out as below: 
1. The steps in the following process are carried 
out one by one. When one of the steps ucceeds, 
go to process 2. If all of the processes fail, go 
to process 4. 
(a) syntax and semantics analysis for legal sen- 
tence without omission of post-positions 
and inversion of word order. 
(b) syntax and semantics analysis for sentence 
including omission of post-positions. 
(c) syntax and semantics analysis for sentence 
including omission of post-positions and in- 
version of word order. 
(d) syntax and semantics analysis for sen- 
tence including invalid (misrecognized) 
post-positions and inversion of word order. 
2. Fundamental contextual processing is per- 
formed. 
(a) Replace demonstrative word with adequate 
words registered for a demonstrative word 
database 
(b) Unify different semantic networks using de- 
fault knowledges, which are considered to 
be semantically equivalent to each other 
(processing for semantically omissions). 
3. Semantic representation of the sentence is 
checked using contextual knowledge (we call it 
filtering hereafter). 
(a) correct case: Output the semantic repre- 
sentation of the analysis result (end of anal- 
ysis). 
(b) incorrect case: If there are some heuristics 
for correcting, apply them to the seman- 
tic representation. The corrected semantic 
representation is the result of analysis (end 
of analysis). If there aren't any applicable 
heuristics, go to process 4. 
4. Keyword analysis (later mentioned) is per- 
formed by using a partial result of the analysis. 
First, the interpreter assumes that there are no 
omissions and inversions in the sentence(l-a). Sec- 
ond, when the analysis fails, the interpreter uses the 
heuristics which enable to recover about 90% of in- 
versions and post-position omissions(Yamamoto et 
al., 92)(1-b,c). Furthermore, when the interpreter 
fails the analysis using the heuristics, it assumes 
that the post-position is wrong. Post-positions as- 
sumed to be wrong are ignored and the correct post- 
position is guessed using above heuristics(i-d). The 
interpreter gives the priority to the interpretation 
where the number of post-position assumed to be 
wrong is a few as possible. 
Human agents can recover illegal sentences by us- 
ing general syntactical knowledge and/or contextual 
knowledge. To do this process by computer, we re- 
alized a filtering process(3-b). Contextually disal- 
lowable semantic representations are registered as 
filters. This process has 2 functions. One is to block 
semantic networks including the same as the regis- 
tered networks for wrong patterns. The other is to 
modify networks so that they can be accepted as 
semantically correct. If the input pattern matches 
with one of the registered patterns, its semantic rep- 
resentation is rejected, and the correction procedure 
is applied if possible. The patterns are specified 
as semantic representations i cluding variables, and 
the matching algorithm works a unification-like. 
When no network is generated at this stage, the 
interpreter checks the sentence using keyword based 
method(4). The interpreter has several dozens of 
template networks which have semantic onditions 
on some nodes. If one of them is satisfied by some 
words in the sentence, it is accepted as the corre- 
sponding semantic network. 
4 The Cooperative Response 
Generator  
Dialogue system through natural anguage must be 
designed so that it can cooperatively response to 
users. For example, if a user's query doesn't have 
enough conditions/information t  answer the ques- 
tion by sysytem, or if there is much retrieved in- 
formation from the knowledge database for user's 
question, the dialogue manager queries the user to 
get necessary conditions or to select the candidate, 
respectively. Further, if the system can't retrieve 
any information related to the user's question, the 
generator proposes an alternative plan. Based on 
these considerations, we developed a cooperative re- 
sponse generator in the dialogue system. 
The response generator is composed of dialogue 
manager, intention(focus) analyzer, problem solver, 
knowledge databases, and response sentence gener- 
ator as shown in Figure 2 (lower part). 
Firstly, the dialogue manager eceives a semantic 
representation (that is,semantic network) through 
the semantic interpreter for the user's utterance. 
The dialogue manager is a component which carries 
out some operations uch as dialogue management, 
control of contextual information and query to users. 
Secondly, to get intention for managing dialogues, 
the dialogue manager passes emantic network to in- 
tention(M) analyzer which extracts a dialogue inten- 
tion and conditions/information of a user's query. 
Then, the dialogue manager decides a flow of di- 
alogue using the intention that is sent back from 
the intention analyzer and acquires available infor- 
mation from dialogue history as contextual informa- 
tion. Thirdly, the dialogue manager passes a seman- 
tic network and contextual information to problem 
solver to retrieve any information from the knowl- 
edge database. Further, if the problem solver can't 
retrieve any information related to the user's ques- 
tion, the problem solver proposes an alternative plan 
(information) by changing a part of conditions of 
usr's query and send it back to dialgoue manager. 
Then the dialogue manager counts a number of 
retrieved information. If there is much retrieved 
information from the knowledge database for user's 
question, the dialogue manager queries further con- 
ditions to the user to select the information. If the 
number of these is adequate, the dialogue manager 
gives a semantic network and retrieved information 
to the response sentence generator. 
Finally, the response sentence generator decides 
a response form from the received inputs and then 
forms response sentence networks according to this 
form. After this process was finished, the response 
sentence generator converts these networks into re- 
sponse sentences. 
5 Evaluation Experiment 
5.1 Overview 
In order to evaluate our dialogue system with the 
multi-modal interfaces, we investigated its perfor- 
mance through the evaluation experiments, paying 
attention to "usefulness of our system". 
We gave a task of making some plans of Mt.Fuji 
sightseeing to 10 users\[A ... J\] ( 6 users where eval- 
uation of language processing part ) who did not 
know about this system\[novises\] in advance. The 
number of items that user should fill in using our 
system in this experiment is eight: "Where to go" 
and "What to do" in first day and second day, and 
"Where to stay", "Kind of accommodation", "Ac- 
commodation name", and "Accommodation fee" in 
first night. We explained this dialogue system to 
them and asked them to speak to the system freely 
and spontaneously. 
And we gave three dialogue modes to every sub- 
jects, as shown in below : 
mode-A Using only speech input and output (our 
conventional system) 
59 
mode-B Using speech input and multi-modal out- 
put (graphical output on display and 
speech output) 
mode-C Using multi-modal input and output (in- 
put : speech and using touch screen, out- 
put : speech and graphic on display) 
Users used three systems on-line mode at the com- 
puter room. 
In this experiment, the performances (recognition 
/ comprehension rate, dialogue time, number of ut- 
terances) of three systems were not seen explicit dif- 
ferences, because the system is imperfect. 
5.2 Evaluation of the language processing 
part through the experimental result 
Table 1 shows the performance of our system 
through experiments using mode-A system, which 
investigated the performance of the language pro- 
cessing parts. 
The column of "Speech input" is the result that 
experiments was done in practice. And the column 
of "Text input" is the perforamnce of our system, 
when system inputted a transcription of user's ut- 
terances that the recognition rate of the speech rec- 
ognizer was assumed as 100%. "Semicorrect Recog" 
means the recognition rate that permitted some 
recognition errors of particles. "Data presentation" 
is the rate that the system offered the valuable infor- 
mation to user. "System query" is the rate that the 
system queried the user to get necessary conditions 
and to select the information. "Alternative plan" 
is the rate that the system proposed the alternative 
plan. "Correct response" is the sum of "Data pre- 
sentation", System query", "Alternative plan" and 
rate that the intepreter was unsuccessful in gener- 
ating a semantic network. "Retrieval failure" is the 
rate that the system could not offer the valuable in- 
formation to user although the interpreter has been 
successful in generating a semantic network. 
The number of total utterances was 101. 81 out 
of 101 were acceptable by the grammar of the rec- 
ognizer. 12 unacceptable out of 20 utterances were 
caused by unknown words, so we considered that it 
was very important to solve the unknown word prob- 
lem. And, 8 out of 20 were not acceptable by the 
grammar. The recognition rate of the speech recog- 
nizer on the spontaneous speech was 20.8%. In the 
speech input, the system unterstood about 55% of 
the all utterances and offered the available informa- 
tion to user about 55% (42.6%+9.0%+3.0%). And 
in the text input, these rates were 90% and 80%, 
respectively. These rates show that the language 
processing part worked well. 
6 Conc lus ion  
We developed the robust interpreter that can ac- 
cept not only spontaneous speech but also misrecog- 
nized sentences. The interpreter was implemented to 
our dialogue system for spontaneous speech which 
worked in the task domain of "Mt.Fuji sightsee- 
ing guidance". Further more, based on that dialog 
system through natural anguage must be designed 
Table 
Evaluation 
Subjects(users) 
Utterances 
Correct recognition 
Semicorrect Recog 
Interpretation 
Correct response 
Data presentation 
System query 
Alternative plan 
Retrieval failure 
Evaluation results 
Speech input Text input 
sentence(%) sentences(%) 
6 users 
101(100%) 
21(20.8% ~ 
56q 55.4% b 
56155:4% 
81180.2% I 
43(42.6%) 
9(9.0% : 
3(3.0%: 
4(4.0%.~ 
90(89.1%) 
87(86.1%) 
64(63.4%) 
12(12.0%) 
~(5.0%) 
, 9(8.9%) 
so that it can cooperatively response to users, we 
devloped a cooperative response generator in the 
dialogue system. This dialogue system was inte- 
grated with a touch screen input method. Exper- 
iments howed that our interpretation mechanism is 
suitable for understanding the recognition result of 
spontaneous speech. And we found that the multi- 
modal interface with spontaneous speech and touch 
screen was user-friendly. 
Re ferences  
E.Jackson, J.Bear, R.Moore, and A.Podlozny: "A 
template matcher for robust NL interpretation" 
Proc. Speech and Natural Language Workshop, 
Morgan Kaufmann Inc., pp.190-194, Feb.19-22 
(1991). 
W.Ward and S.Young: "Flexible use of seman- 
tic constraints in speech recognition," Proc. Int. 
Conf. Acoustics, Speech & Signal Process, vol. II, 
pp.49-50, Minneapolis (1993). 
D.Teil and Y.Bellik : Multimodal dialogue inter- 
face on a workstation, Venaco Workshop and 
ETRW on "The structure of multimodal dia- 
logue", Maratea (1991). 
A.Kai and S.Nakagawa : "Investigation on un- 
known word processing and strategies for sponta- 
neous peech understanding", Proceedings of EU- 
ROSPEECH 95, pp.2095-2098 (1995). 
M.Yamamoto, S.Kobayashi, S.Nakagawa: "An 
analysis and parsing method of the omission 
of post-position and inversion on japanese spo- 
ken sentence in dialog", Transactions of Informa- 
tion Processing Society of Japan Vol.33~ No.11, 
pp.1322-1330(1992), in Japanese. 
T.Itoh, M.ttidano, M.Yamamoto and S.Nakagawa : 
"Spontaneous Speech Understanding for a Robust 
Dialogue System", Proceeding of Natural Lan- 
guage Processing Pacific Rim Symposium '95, Vol- 
ume 2, pp.538-543 (1995). 
A.Denda, T.Itoh, and S.Nakagawa : "A Robust 
Dialogue System with Spontaneous Speech and 
Touch Screen", Proceeding of the First Interna- 
tional Conference on Multumodal Interface '96, 
pp.144-151 ( 996). 
60 
