Measuring Dialect Distance Phonet ica l ly  
J ohn  Nerbonne and Wi lber t  Heer inga  
A l fa - in format ica ,  BCN 
P .O.Box  716, R i jksunivers i te i t  Gron ingen  
NL-9700 AS Groningen,  The  Nether lands  
nerbonne~let, rug .  nl 
Abst rac t  
We describe ongoing work in the experi- 
mental evaluation of a range of methods 
for measuring the phonetic distance be- 
tween the dialectal variants of pronuncia- 
tions. Alllare variants of Levenshtein dis- 
tance, both simple (based on atomic char- 
acters) and complex (based on feature vec- 
tors). The measurements using feature vec- 
tors varied according to whether city-block 
distance, Euclidean distance or (a measure 
using) Pearson's correlation coefficient was 
taken as basic. Variants of these using fea- 
ture weighting by entropy reduction were 
systematically compared, as was the rep- 
resentation of diphthongs (as one symbol 
or two). The results were compared to 
well-established scholarship in dialectology, 
yielding a Calibration of the method. These 
results indicate that feature representa- 
tions are more sensitive, that city-block dis- 
tance is a good measure of phonetic over- 
lap of feature vectors, that weighting is not 
useful, and that two-phone representations 
of diphthongs provide a more satisfactory 
base for this sort of comparison. 
Keywords:  dialectology, phonetic (dis)similarity 
1 Mot ivat ion  
Dialectologists frequently speak of the range of di- 
alects they describe as a "continuum", 1 which sug- 
gests a need t0 supersede the inherently discrete 
method of isogl0sses. Dialectologists have long rec- 
ognized the need for alternative notions of dialectal 
relationships (Durand (1889),p.49). 
1For example,.Tait ol/Inuit: ';a fairly unbroken chain 
of dialects \[...\] the furthest extremes of the continuum 
being unintelligib!e to one another" (Tait (1994), p.3) 
It is furthermore the case that a sensitive measure 
of dialectal distance could have broad application to 
questions in sociolinguistics and historical inguis- 
tics, e.g. the significance of political boundaries, the 
effect of the media, etc. 
Levenshtein distance is a measure of string dis- 
tance that has been applied to problems in speech 
recognition, bird song ethology, and genetics. It is 
presented in (Kruskal, 1983), and may be under- 
stood as the cost of (the least costly set of) oper- 
ations mapping from one string to another. 
Kessler (1995) applied Levenshtein distance to 
Irish Gaelic dialects with remarkable success, 
and Nerbonne t al. (1996) extended the applica- 
tion of his techniques to Dutch dialects, simi- 
larly with respectable results. Although Kessler 
and Nerbonne t al. (1996) experimented with more 
sensitive measures, their best results were based on 
calculations of phonetic distance in which phonetic 
overlap was binary: nonidentical phones contribute 
to phonetic distance, identical ones do not. Thus 
the pair \[a,t\] count as different o the same degree 
as 
2 Background 
In the interest of space we omit an introduction to 
Levenshtein distance, referring to (Kruskal, 1983). 
It may be understood as the cost of (the least costly 
set of) operations mapping from one string to an- 
other. The basic costs are those of (single-phone) 
insertions and deletions, each of which costs half that 
of substitutions. Nerbonne t al. (1996)explains its 
use in the present application at some length. The 
various modifications below all tinker with the cost 
of substituting one phone for another. 
Kessler (1995) experimented with making the 
measure more sensitive, but found little progress in 
using features, for example. The present paper ex- 
periments ystematically with several variations on 
the basic Levenshtein theme. 
il 
The overall scheme is as follows: a definition of 
phonetic difference is applied to 101 pairs of words 
from forty different Dutch dialect areas. All of the 
pronunciations are taken from the standard dialect 
atlas ((Blacquart et al 19251982)--hence: REND, 
Reeks Nederlandse Dialectatlassen). After some nor- 
malization, this results in an AVER.AGE PHONETIC 
difference for those dialects--a 40 x 40 matrix of dif- 
ferences in total (of which one half is redundant due 
to the symmetry of distance: dist(a, b) = dist(b, a)). 
This distance matrix is compared to existing ac- 
counts of the dialects in question, especially the most 
recent systematic account, (Daan and Blok, 1969). 
A visualization tool normally identifies very deviant 
results, see Fig. 1. Finally the distance matrix is 
subjected to a heuristic clustering algorithm as a 
further indication of quality. 2
3 Ref inements for Dialectology 
The dialects are compared on the basis of the words 
of 101 items. So the total distance of two dialects 
is equal to the sum of 101 Levenshtein-distances. 
If  we simply use the Levenshtein-distance, it would 
tend to bias measurements so that changes in longer 
words would tend to contribute more toward the av- 
erage phonetic distance (since they tend to involve 
more changes). This may be legitimate, but since 
words are a crucial linguistic unit we chose to stick 
to average word distance. This involves the com- 
putation of 'relative distance', which we get by di- 
viding the absolute distance by the length of the 
larger word. We have also considered using the av- 
erage length of the two words being compared, which 
makes little difference where both words are present. 
Missing words pose a problem as does lexical re- 
placement. We wished to handle these consistently 
(to obtain a consistent measure of distance), even 
recognizing the danger of conflating phonetic and 
lexical effects. Throughout his paper we do con- 
flate the two, reasoning that this is the lesser of two 
evi ls--the other of which is deciding when massive 
phonetic modification amounts to lexical difference. 
Naturally no difference is recorded where a word 
is missing in both dialects. If only one dialect is 
missing the word, the difference at that point is 
just length ? insertion-cost, but normalization di- 
vides this by the length again, yielding just the cost 
of insertion. This is a point at which the decision 
2The choice of clustering technique is important, but 
is not the focus of the present paper. The methods 
here were compared using Ward's method, a variant of 
hierarchical agglommerative clustering which minimizes 
squared error. See (Jain and Dubes, 1988) for clustering 
techniques. 
noted above-to obtain relative distance via Leven- 
shtein distance divided by longer length-is impor- 
tant. Recall the alternative mentioned there, that of 
relativizing to the average length. This would dou- 
ble the distance measured in cases where words are 
missing, biasing the overall distance toward dialects 
with less lexical overlap. This seemed excessive. 
Similarly, for some items there are two words 
possible. If dialect 1 has wordla and wordlb, 
and dialect 2 has word2, we calculate the dis- 
tance by averaging dislance(wordla,word2) and dis- 
tance(wordlb,word2). If both dialect 1 and dialect 
2 have multiple variants, we average all pairs of dis- 
tances. 
Although we experimented with variable costs 
for substitutions, depending on whether their base 
segments or diacritics differ, we could not settle 
on a natural weighting, and further reasoned that 
a feature-based cost-differential should systematize 
what the transcription-based differential intended. 
This is resumed below. 
Dutch has a rich system of diphthongs, which, 
moreover have been argued to be phonologically di- 
segmental (Moulton, 1962). We therefore experi- 
mented both with single-phone and two-phone diph- 
thongal representations. It turned out the represen- 
tations with two phones were superior (for the pur- 
poses of showing dialectal relatedness). 3 
3.1 Feature  Vectors  
If we compare dialects on the basis of phonetic sym- 
bols, it is not possible to take into account he affin- 
ity between sounds that are not equal, but are still 
related. Methods based on phonetic symbols do not 
show that 'pater'  and 'vader' are more kindred then 
'pater'  and 'maler'. This problem can be solved by 
replacing each phonetic symbol by a vector of fea- 
tures. Each feature can be regarded as a phonetic 
property which can be used for classifying of sounds. 
A feature vector contains for each feature a value 
which indicates to what extent the property is in- 
stantiated. Since diacritics influence feature values, 
they likewise figure in the mapping from transcrip- 
tions to feature vectors, and thus automatically fig- 
ure in calculations of phonetic distance. 
In our experiment, we have used the fea- 
ture vectors which are developed by (Vieregge, 
A.C.M.Rietveld, and Jansen, 1984) (we earlier used 
the SPE features as these were modified for dialec- 
3It would be rash to argue from this to any phono- 
logical conclusion about the diphthongs. The two-phone 
representation makes it easier to measure related pro- 
nunciation, and this is probably why it suits present pur- 
poses better. 
I:z 
tology use by (Hoppenbrouwers and Hoppenbrouw- 
ers, 1988), but obtained distinctly poorer results in 
spite of the larger number of features). Vieregge 
et al make use of 14 features \[longer discussion of 
Vieregge's ystem as well as the translation tran- 
scriptions in the RND in full version of paper\]. 
We compare three methods for measuring pho- 
netic distance/ The first is MANHATTAN DISTANCE 
(also called "taxicab distance" or "city block" dis- 
tance). This is simply the sum of all feature value 
differences for each of the 14 features in the vector. 
Y) = - 
Second, we tried EUCLIDEAN DISTANCE. As 
usual, this is the square root of the sum of 
squared differences in feature values. 6(X,Y)  = 
v/Ei l (xi  - 
Third, we examined the Pearson correlation coef- 
ficient, r. To ixiterpret this as distance we used 1 - r, 
where r is the usual ~ ~ ('-TU)(~-~ y_.A,~ ).
In the Levenshtein algorithm based on symbols, 
three operations were used: 'substitution', inser- 
tion' and 'deletion'. A substitution was regarded 
as a combination of an insertion and a deletion, so 
substitutions counted two, and "indels" one. When 
we compare vectors instead Of phonetic symbols, the 
value for a substitution is no longer a fixed value, but 
varies between '.two extremes. However, for indels we 
have to choose'a fixed value as well. This value was 
estimated by calculating the average of the values of 
all substitutiofis which take place in the comparison 
proces, and dividing this average by 2. 
3.2 In fo rmat ion-Ga in  Weight ing  
Not all features are equally important in classify- 
ing the sounds lused in the dialects. For example, it 
turned out that no positive value for the feature \[flap 
=t:\] occurred in any of the words in the dialects exam- 
ined. We therefore xperimented with weighing each 
feature by information gain, a number expressing the 
average ntropy reduction a feature represents when 
known (Quinlan, 1993; Daelemans et al, 1996). 
To calculate this we need a base figure for 
database ntropy: 
H(D) = -- E pilog2pi 
i 
If we have n: different vectors for all the dialects, 
then 1 < i < n. Pi is the probability of vector i, 
estimated by its frequency divided by ID\[, which is 
the total number of vectors in all dialects. 
Second we calculate the average ntropy for each 
feature: 
ID\[/ 
H(D\[y\]) = E H(Du='~'\]) 
v,~v IDI 
\[Dll=~d\[ is the number of vectors that have value 
vi for feature f .  V is the set of possible values for 
feature f. H(Du=vd) is the remaining entropy of all 
vectors in the database that have value vi for feature 
f. It is calculated using the first formula, where the 
i's are now only the vectors that have value vi for 
feature f. 
Finally we can calculate the information gain as- 
sociated with a feature: 
G(f)  = H(D) - H(Dll\]) 
If we then compare two vectors using Manhattan 
distance, the weighted difference between two vec- 
tors X and Y is now: 
T~ 
A(x,  y)  = a ( / , ) l x ,  - 
i= l  
And similarly for Euclidean distance and "inverse 
correlation". 
We have recently become aware of the work of 
Broe (1996), which criticizes the simple application 
of entropy measures to feature systems in which 
some features are only partially defined. Such 
phonological features clearly exist: e.g., \[lateral\] 
and \ [s t r ident \ ]  apply only to consonants and not to 
vowels. Broe furthermore develops a generalization 
of entropy sensitive to these cases. This is an area 
of current interest. 
4 Experiments 
The dialect varieties were chosen to contain "easy" 
cases as well as difficult ones. Frisian is accepted 
as rather more distinct from other areas, and eight 
Frisian varieties are represented in the wish to see 
quickly that that distance metrics could distinguish 
these. The full list of variants may be seen in Fig. 1. 
5 Results 
We compared a total of 14 methods, shown in Ta- 
ble 1. While none of these performed very poorly, 
several tendencies emerge. 
Two-phone representations of diphthongs out- 
perform single-phone representations 
Unweighted representations outperform repre- 
sentations to which weightings were added. 
This is surprising. 
Manhattan distance narrowly outperforms 
"correlation" which narrowly outperforms Eu- 
clidean distance. 
13 
0 
 . Oe rdsberg 
/ 
Kumtich 
. . . . . . .  
erkrade 
Figure 1: The distances calculated between the 40 pairs of Dutch dialects. Darker lines correspond to 
phonetically proximate language variants, lighter lines to more distant variants. Phonetically very distant 
relations result in lines too faint to be seen (in the interest of overall contrast). The Frisian dialects (in the 
Northwest) are clearly recognized as relatively close, as are the Saxon dialects (Northeast). The situation in 
the South is less simple. 
It  
phone/feature-based weighted feature-comparison diphthong 
1 phones one phone 
2 phones two phones 
3 features no Manhattan two phones 
4 features no Manhattan one phone 
5 features no Euclidean two phones 
6 features no Euclidean one phone 
7 features no correlation two phones 
8 features no correlation one phone 
9 features yes Manhattan two phones 
10 features yes Manhattan one phone 
11 features yes Euclidean two phones 
12 features yes Euclidean one phone 
13 features yes correlation two phones 
14 features yes correlation one phone 
Table 1: Fourteen variants of Levenshtein distance which were compared in the task of distinguishing Dutch 
dialect distances. Top performer (3) used features in place of discrete segments, no information-gain weight- 
ing, Manhattan (city-block) distance, and a two-segment representation f diphthongs. 
Thus, method (:3) was best. 
The superiority is seen in the degree to which the 
distance matrices and resulting dendrograms match 
those of expert dialectologists, in particular, (Daan 
and Blok, 1969). 4
We did not apply a measure to the degree of co- 
incidence between the experts' division into dialect 
groups and the grouping induced by the Levenshtein 
distance metric, Instead, we compared the dendro- 
gram to the dialect map and checked for congruence. 
Some of the results accord better with expert opin- 
ion. 
For example, dialectologists generally locate Delft 
as closer to Haarlem and Schagen (than to Oost- 
erhout, Dussen and Gemert). The better distance 
measures do this as well, but not several of the 
weighted measures. The weighted measures and 
the unweighted correlation-based measures similarly 
failed to recogniz:e the coastal (western) Flemish sub- 
group (Weslflaams or Zeeuwsvlaams), represented in
our data set by Alveringem, Damme, Lamswaarde, 
and Renesse. 
Daan's work is accompanied by a map that also 
appears in the Atlas of the Netherlands, as Plate 
4It should be noted that Daan and Blok (1969) incor- 
porate native speakers' ubjective judgements of dialect 
distance in their assessment ( heir "arrow method"). 
But their final partition of dialects into differenct groups 
is well-accepted. 
X-2. 5 It divides the Dutch area into 28 areas of 
roughly comparable dialect regions. Furthermore, 
it uses colortones to denote relative distance from 
standard Dutch. This information can be used to 
further calibrate the methods here. First, the rela- 
tive distance from standard Dutch (given in color- 
tones) can be translated to predictions about relative 
phonetic distance. For example, Twents is shaded 
dark green (and is represented in our data set by 
the the dialect spoken in Almelo), while Veluws is 
shaded light green (and is represented by Soest and 
Putten). There is an intermediate dialect, Gelders- 
Overijssels haded an intermediate green and rep- 
resented by Ommen, Wijhe and Spankeren. These 
relative distances (to ABN, represented in our data 
set by Haarlem and Delft) should be reflected in Lev- 
enshtein distance, and we can test the prediction by 
how accurate the relfection is. This method of test- 
ing has the large advantage that it tests only Leven- 
shtein distance without involving the added level of 
clustering. 
A second method of using the dialect map to cal- 
ibrate the Levenshtein metric is to use the 28 var- 
ious dialect regions as predictions of "minimal dis- 
tance". Here we can compare the map most simply 
to the dendrogram. In the present work, it may 
be noted that the Frisian dialects and the dialect 
of Groningen-North Drenth are indeed identified as 
5Printed by the Topografische Dienst, Delft, 1968. 
15 
groups (by the Levenshtein method combined mini- 
mal error clustering). It is more difficult to use the 
dialect map in this way without using the dendro- 
gram as well. In particular, it is not clear how the 
borders on the dialect map are to be interpreted. 
Keeping in mind the "continuum" metaphor noted 
in Sec. 1, the borders cannot be interpreted to be 
marking partitions of minimal distance. That is, it 
will not be the case that each pair of elements in 
a given cluster are closer to each other than to any 
elements outside. 
An interesting fact is that while no very close 
correlation is expected between dialectal distance 
and geographical distance, still the better techniques 
generally correlated higher with geographic distance 
than did the poorer techniques (at approx, r = 
0.72). 
We conclude that the present methods perform 
well, and we discuss opportunities for more defini- 
tive testing and further development in the following 
section. 
6 Future  D i rec t ions  
We should like to extend this work in several direc- 
tions. 
? We should like to find a way to measure the 
success of a given distance metric. This should 
reflect the degree to which it coincides with ex- 
pert opinion (which is necessarily rougher). See 
Sec. 5. 
? An examination of grouping methods is desir- 
able. 
? The present method averages 101 word dis- 
tances to arrive at a notion of dialect difference. 
It would he interesting to experiment directly 
with the 101-dimensional vector, standardized 
to reflect the distance to standard Dutch (alge- 
meen beschaafd Nederlands, ABN) and using, 
e.g., the cos(~,y~ as a distance measure (on 
vectors whose individual cells represent Leven- 
shtein distances from ABN pronunciations). 
? For more definitive results, the method should 
be tested on material for which it has NOT been 
calibrated, ideally a large database of dialectal 
material. 
? Finally, it would be interesting to apply the 
technique to problems involving the influence 
of external factors on language variation, such 
as migration, change in political boundaries, or 
cultural innovation. 
7 Acknowledgernents 
We thank Peter Kleiweg for his graphic programs 
(seen in all of the figures here), and thanks also to 
an anonymous reviewer for comments. 
Re ferences  
Blacquart et al E. 
dialectatlassen. 
1925/1982. Reeks nederlandse 
Broe, Michael. 1996. A generalized information- 
theoretic measure for systems of phonological 
classification and recognition. In Computational 
Phonology in Speech Technology: Proceedings of 
the Second Meeting of the ACL Special Interest 
Group in Computational Phonology, pages 17-24, 
Santa Cruz. Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics. 
Daan, Jo and D. P. Blok. 1969. Van Randstad 
tot Landrand; toelichting bij de kaart: Dialecten 
en Naamkunde. Amsterdam: Noord-Hollandsche 
Uitgevers. 
Daelemans, Walter, Jakub Zavrel, Peter Berck, and 
Steven Gillis. 1996. Memory-based part of speech 
tagging. In Gert Durieux, Walter Daelemans, and 
Steven Gillis, editors, Proc. of CLIN '95. Antwer- 
pen, pages 185-202. 
Durand, Jean-Paul. 1889. Notes de philologie rouer- 
gate, 18. Revues des Langues Romanes, 33:47-84. 
cited by Kessler. 
Hoppenbrouwers, Cot and Geer Hoppenbrouwers. 
1988. De featurefrequentiemethode en de classifi- 
catie van nederlandse dialecten. TABU: Bulletin 
voor Taalwetenschap, 18(2):51-92. 
Jain, K. and R. C. Dubes. 1988. Algorithms for 
clustering Data. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 
Prentice Hall. 
Kessler, Brett. 1995. Computational dialectology in 
Irish Gaelic. In Proc. of the European ACL, pages 
60-67, Dublin. 
Kruskal, Joseph. 1983. An overview of se- 
quence comparison. In David Sankoff and Joseph 
Kruskal, editors, Time Warps, String Edits and 
Macromolecules: The Theory and Practice of 
Sequence Comparison. Addison-Wesley, Reading, 
Mass., pages 1-44. 
Moulton, William. 1962. The vowels of dutch: Pho- 
netic and distributional classes. Lingua, 11:294- 
312. 
Aalten 
Spankeren 
Putten 
Almelo 
Ornmen 
Wijhe 
Steenwijk 
Assen 
Groningen 
Roswinkel 
Rodeschool 
IWinschoten 
Alveringem 
Damme 
Lamswaarde 
Renesse 
Geel 
Kumtich 
Mechelen 
Geraardsbergen 
Lebbeke 
Born 
Venray 
Kerkrade 
Delft 
Haarlem 
Schagen 
Dussen 
, Oosterhout 
Gemert 
Polsbroek 
Soest 
Bergum 
Grouw 
Ferwerd 
Holwerd 
Makkum 
Kollum 
Leeuwarden - -  
Nes 
0:0 200.0 ' ' 600.0 400.0 
Figure 2: A dendrogram derived fi'om the distance matrix based on (unweighted) Manhattan distance 
between feature representations. Note that Frisian and Dutch variants are distinguished most significantly, 
while within Dutch there major distinctions are Lower Saxon dialects (top), Flemish, and Franeonian (lowest 
of the three most significant branches within Dutch). This accords well with dialectal scholarship. The 
dendrogram was obtained using a Ward's method of hierarchical agglommerative clustering, a minimized 
square-error method. Alternative clustering methods have also been compared in this project, but that topic 
is beyond the bounds of this paper. 
1'7 
f Lee 
Nes~ 
u 
m~ 
Kerkrade 
Figure 3: The four most significant dialect groups isolated bu this method correspond to Frisian (northwest, 
dark), Lower Saxon (northeast,light), Franconian (central, light-intermediate) and Flemish (south, dark- 
intermediate). 
Nerbonne, John, Wilbert Heeringa, Erik van den 
Hout, 
Peter van der Kooi, Simone Otten, and Willem 
van de Vis. 1996. Phonetic distance between 
dutch dialects. In Gert Durieux, Walter Daele- 
mans, and Steven Gillis, editors, Proc. of CLIN 
'95. Antwerpen, pages 185-202. Also available as 
http ://grid. let. rug. nl/'nerbonne/papers/ 
dialects.ps. 
Quinlan, J. Ross. 1993. C~.5: Programs for Ma- 
chine Learning. San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Tait, Mary. 1994. North America. In Christo- 
pher Moseley and R.E. Asher, editors, Atlas of the 
World's Languages. Routledge, London and New 
York, pages 3-30. 
Vieregge, Wilhelm H., A.C.M.Rietveld, and Carel 
Jansen. 1984. A distinctive feature based system 
for the evaluation of segmental transcription in 
dutch. In Proc. of the lOth htternational Congress 
of Phonetic Sciences, pages 654-659, Dordrecht. 
I'g 
