Scene Direct ion Based Reference In Drama Scenes 
Hi rosh i  Nakagawa 
Yokohama Nat iona l  Un ivers i ty  
79-5 Tok iwada i ,  Hodogaya  
Yokohama,  240, Japan  
nakagawa?nak lab ,  dn j .  ynu .  ac .  j p 
Yoshitomo Yaginuma Masao Sakauch i  
Ins t i tu te  of Indust r ia l  Sc ience 
Un ivers i ty  of Tokyo  
Roppong i ,  M inato ,  Tokyo ,  106, Japan  
{ yaginuma, sakauchi } 
@sak. iis. u-tokyo, ac. j p 
Abstract 
Our research target is reference relations 
between descriptions of script and an ac- 
tor/actress who actually plays in the drama 
scene that correspond to the scene direc- 
tion which is a part of the script. In 
this paper, first we analyze sentences used 
as the scene directions, and classify them. 
Then we propose the rules to extract sub- 
jects and predicates from those sentences. 
With the extracted subjects and predi- 
cates, we build the existence/action map 
that explains the situations happening on 
each scene. The existence/action map we 
build describes cenes very correctly as for 
whether each player appears in each scene 
or not. Our experiment shows that the re- 
call is around 80% and the precision is over 
90%. This means that our system of infer- 
ring reference relations works well for scene 
directions. Then we develop the scene re- 
trieval system in which this map is used 
to retrieve scenes from the drama video 
database according to the input query. We 
also show some experimental results of our 
retrieval system. 
1 In t roduct ion  
In conventional multimedia retrieval systems, image 
data are indexed manually because image process- 
ing technologies have not yet provided us with image 
understanding methods that are powerful enough to 
automatically extract useful indices from image data 
themselves. Then, in order to enhance multimedia 
retrieval systems, we have to employ other types of 
information source. That is why we focus here on 
drama scripts that are apparently natural anguage 
media. However it is obvious that only using scripts 
does not guarantee ffective retrieval. The essen- 
tial point is, of course, the combination of informa- 
tion from language resource and image data. This 
combination can drastically improve the quality and 
efficiency of multimedia retrieval. From this point 
of view, reference relations between a description of 
script and an actor/actress who actually plays in 
the drama scenes that correspond to the script are 
the most useful pieces of information for scene re- 
trieval, and consequently they become our research 
targets. If we successfully identify this kind of ref- 
erence, it is a great help for multimedia information 
retrieval, especially scene retrieval from data base of 
drama videos. However the whole script of drama is 
so complicated that we cannot deal with by today's 
natural language processing technologies. Then we 
concentrate our focus here on scene d i rect ions  that 
explain the situation of each scene in the drama, for 
instance, actors/actresses' position, movement, and 
SO on .  
In section 2 we describe the pieces of information 
which describe a scene. In section 3 we explain our 
natural anguage processing system that extracts in- 
formation describing each scene. There we also show 
the experimental results of our natural anguage pro- 
cessing system. In section 4, we show some results of 
scene retrieval system. Section 5 is the conclusion. 
2 Scene Descr ip t ions  
Each scene of a drama is characterized by the fol- 
lowing five types of information. 
1. Location of the scene. 
2. Time of the scene. 
3. Players on the scene. Actually role name of each 
player is described in the scene direction. 
4. Physical or psychological states of each player 
in the scene. 
5. Actions of each player in the scene. 
These types of information are described in the 
scene direction for individual scene. States and ac- 
tions of a player are described basically for each ut- 
terance or action in the scene direction. Henceforth 
we call a time unit corresponding to an utterance or 
an action as sub-scene. As we will show later, a sub- 
scene is a unit of retrieval. Then we use the following 
classification i  order to describe ach player's tatus 
Scene Direction Based Reference in Drama Scenes 53 
on each sub-scene: 1) being absent (ABS), 2) exist- 
ing(EXI), 3) conversing(CON), and 4)acting(ACT). 
Acting is further described by the verb used in the 
scene direction sentence. Using this classification, 
we can express the contents of scene such as shown 
in the table 1 which we call existence~action map 
of scene. The left most column expresses a sequence 
number of sub-scene in the scene. The second, third, 
fourth and fifth columns correspond to the status of 
each player whose name is shown in the fourth raw. 
The sixth column describes the detail of action by 
the corresponding verb. 
Table 1: An example of existence/action map 
scene 1 
Location: Police office 
Time: evening 
sub Alice Betty John Bill action 
scene 
0 ABS ABS EXI EXI 
i ACT ACT EXI EXI coming back 
2 EXI CON EXI EXI conversing 
3 EXI EXI i CON EXI conversing 
4 EXI EXI ACT EXI going out 
5 EXI EXI ABS EXI 
This example of existence/action map is inter- 
preted as follows. At sub-scene, 0 John and Bill 
exist there. At sub-scene 1, Alice and Betty come 
into this scene. Then at sub-scene 2 and 3, all four 
persons are there, and Betty and John speak one 
after another. At sub-scene 4, John goes out from 
the scene. Therefore at sub-scene 5 he is no more in 
the scene. This kind of map is used in retrieving the 
image data of sub-scene as later described. 
3 Scene Directions Analysis 
3.1 Sentence  Pat terns  of  Scene D i rect ions  
In this section, we describe how to extract informa- 
tion from scene directions in order to build an ex- 
istence/action map of the scene. For this purpose, 
we first characterize the scene directions that are 
actually restricted Japanese sentences. Simple sen- 
tences used as a scene direction are classified into 
the following six patterns. We also show an exam- 
ple sentences of each pattern: 
1. sub jec t  , verb  phrase  
(:) Taroo to Hanako ga 
and NOM 
kaette -kuru. 
come back -kuru 
'Taroo and Hanako come back.' 
In this type of sentence, "ga"(subject marker), 
"wa"(topic marker) or "mo"(topic marker + 
'too') are used as a nominative particle. More- 
over "ga" and "wa" are sometimes replaced with 
a comma ",". 
2. verb  phrase  , sub jec t  
Soto o miru 
(2) outside ACC see 
'Taroo who sees outside.' 
3. verb  phrase  
Taroo. 
Odorite iru. 
(3) surprised being 
'? is surprised.' 
4. sub jec t ,  noun  phrase  
(4) Taroo ga hitori. 
NOM alone 
'Only Taroo is there.' 
5. noun  phrase ,  copu la  
Denwa dearu. 
(5) phone call COPULA 
'A phone call arrives.' 
6. noun  phrase  
Sibaraku-no tinmoku. 
(6) for a while silence 
'No one speaks for a while.' 
We employ a very simple pattern matching based 
information extraction system described later based 
on two reasons: 1) The structures of simple sentence 
used as a scene direction are limited within these 
six patterns. 2) What we would like to extract from 
scene directions in order to build an existence/action 
map is only the following two references. Namely 
who is the subject, and what action or state the 
referent of the subject does or is in. Therefore it is 
enough to extract the subject and the verb (or 'the 
verb + the auxiliary verb'). 
3.2 Sub ject  Ext rac t ion  
Subjects are extracted by matching the patterns S 
generated by the following rules. 
ru le 1 P is a proper name or a common noun. 
ru le  2 P <-- P ","P 
ru le  3 P +- P "to "P ,  where "to" means 'and' in 
English. 
ru le  4 S <-- P ","1 P "ga"l P "wa"l P "me" 
Here a subject corresponds to P. This rule is 
for pattern 1 and 4. 
ru le 5 S +- P ""  
This rule is for pattern 2. 
ru le  6 S +-- P "dearu" I P "da", where "dearu" 
and "da" are copulas in Japanese. 
This rule is for pattern 5. 
54 H. Nakagawa, Y. Yaginuma nd M. Sakauchi 
It is not necessary to extract a subject from the 
sentence of pattern 6. A sentence of this pattern 
usually describes the atmosphere of the scene. As for 
pattern 3, we have to infer the referent of omitted 
subject, namely zero subject. We have a plenty of 
theories for this purpose including centering theories 
(Brennan et. al ,  1987; Kameyama, 1988; Walker et. 
al , 1994). Here, however, we employ a very simple 
rule as follows. 
ru le  7 The referent of zero subject is the same as 
the referent of subject of the previous entence. 
This rule is a small subset of centering theory, but as 
you will see later, it works well to extract a subject 
from a sentence of scene direction. We also apply 
this rule for a complex sentence in which a subject 
of main clause is omitted. Namely the omitted sub- 
ject is deemed to corefer with the explicit subject of 
subordinate clause. The reason of this is that 1) in 
a scene direction, a sequence of actions is described, 
and 2) in a complex sentence of scene direction, a 
subordinate clause describes an action or state that 
happens prior to the action or state described by 
the main clause. In other words, a subordinate and 
a main clause of the complex sentence can be re- 
garded as two consecutive simple sentences. 
3.3 P red icate  Ext rac t ion  
As for pattern 1, 2 and 3, we can extract a predicate 
just by extracting a verb or a verb + an auxiliary 
verb from the sentence. In pattern 4, we cannot 
identify the exact action or state from the sentence. 
But at least, we know that there exists a person the 
subject refers to. Therefore a predicate extracted 
from a sentence of pattern 4 is regarded as "exist" by 
default. We couldn't find any reasonable predicate 
for sentences of pattern 5 and 6. Then we also use 
"exist" in these patterns as we do in pattern 4. In 
sum, we use the following rule to extract a predicate 
from a scene direction. 
ru le  8 A predicate of the sentence is either a verb ( 
+ an auxiliary verb) used in a sentence of pat- 
tern 1, 2, or 3, or "exist' in a sentence of pattern 
4, 5or  6. 
3.4 Building An Existence/Action Map 
In this system, the purpose of semantic interpreta- 
tion is limited to build an existence/action map from 
the extracted subjects and predicates by the way de- 
scribed in section 3.2 and 3.3. For this purpose, the 
key element of predicate is the so called directional 
auxiliary verb(Kuno, 1978). There are several di- 
rectional auxiliary verbs in Japanese. Among them, 
the most essential ones for our purpose are "-tekuru" 
and "-teiku". The directions indicated by these aux- 
iliary verbs are defined relative to the position of 
camera. If "-tekuru" is a part of the predicate of 
sentence, a referent of the subject of the sentence 
comes into the camera angle and/or is approaching 
the camera. If "-teiku" is a part of the predicate 
of sentence, a referent of the subject of the sentence 
goes away from the camera and probably is out of 
the camera ngle. The situation is depicted as shown 
in figure 1. 
Figure 1: Movement of "tekuru" and "teiku" 
scene  
camera  
0 ' kuru '
q 
' iku', ~_  
In addition, basic verbs, "kuru('come')" and 
"iku('go')", also express the same type of sense of 
direction as "-tekuru" and "-teiku" do respectively. 
By these considerations, we drive the following two 
default rules to infer existence or absence of the ref- 
erent of the subject in the scene. 
ru le  9 If the predicate of sentence includes an auxil- 
iary verb "-tekuru" or a verb "kuru", a referent 
of the subject of the sentence had not been in 
the scene beforehand, and just has come into 
the scene. 
ru le  10 If the predicate of sentence includes an aux- 
iliary verb "-teiku" or a verb "iku", a referent 
of the subject of the sentence will not exist in 
the scene afterward. 
Of course, these two rules are default rules, and 
there are exceptional cases. For instance, if a sen- 
tence explicitly describes that Taroo has existed in 
the scene beforehand, even though we encounter the 
sentence that 
tikayot -tekuru. 
(7) Taroo SUB approach 
'Taroo approaches to here.' 
, we infer that Taroo has already been in the scene. 
Or in "-teiku" case, if the sentence: 
(s) 
Taroo, ttanako -ni tikayot -teiku. 
SUB -DAT approach 
'Taroo approaches to Hanako.' 
is followed by the sentence: 
Taroo Hanako -ni 
(9) SUB -DAT 
nagur -areru. 
hit -PASSIVE 
'Taroo is hit by Hanako.' 
, then we infer that Taroo is still in the scene after 
the action described by (9). 
Scene Direction Based Reference in Drama Scenes 55 
Another exceptional case is that a verb is either 
stative or state change without action. For instance, 
the sentence: 
(10) 
kaoiro-ga-warukunat -teiku. 
Taroo SUB become pale 
'Taroo turns pale.' 
indicates that Taroo is still in the scene when he 
looks pale. We can identify these kind of verbs, sta- 
tive and state change without action, with a dic- 
tionary like IPAL-Basic Verb Dictionary For Com- 
puter(IPA, 1990). 
Although the rules and the treatment of excep- 
tional cases are very important, generally if a sen- 
tence of scene direction describes that the referent 
of subject does an action or is in a certain state, the 
referent surely exists in the scene. Another group 
of expressions that are frequently used and are im- 
portant to build an existence/action map are a sta- 
tive verb "iru('exist')" and its negation "inai('not 
exist')." They explicitly show the existence or non- 
existence of a referent of subject in the scene. Then 
we have the following two rules. 
ru le 11 If a sentence describes an action or state, 
the referent of the subject is in the scene. 
ru le  12 If "iru" is used as a predicate, the referent 
of the subject is in the scene. 
If "inai" is used as a predicate, the referent of 
the subject is not in the scene. 
These two rules can override the results we infer 
by rule 9 or rule 10, because rule 9 and 10 are default 
rules and rule 11 and 12 explicitly describe the scene. 
One question we have here is that if we encounter a
negative predicate like "inai", how should we infer. 
However, in reality, we don't find negative predicates 
except for "inai" in scene directions, because scene 
directions describe what players should do in the 
scene, and they almost never describe what players 
shouldn't do in the scene. Things not to be done in 
a scene are usually directed by the human director 
of the drama. 
Now we show an example of existence/action map 
built from the following scene directions. 
(11) Taroo to Jiro ga 
and SUB 
kaet -tekuru. 
come back 
'Taroo and Jiro come back.' 
Taroo " tadaima "
(12) SUB " I 'm home " 
'Taroo says " I 'm home."' 
(13) Hanako ~ "gokurousan"  
UB " you did well. " 
' I Ianako says " You did well"' 
(14) to nagusameru. 
and comfort 
'and comforts two of them.' 
Saburoo tokei -o (15) SUB clock -ACC 
'Saburoo looks at the clock.' 
Saburoo de -teiku. (16) SUB go out 
'Saburoo goes out.' 
The existence/action map derived 
through (16) is as follows. 
sub-scene Taroo Jiro Hanako 
action 
before 11 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
after 16 
miru. 
look at 
from (11) 
Saburoo 
ABS ABS EXI \] EXI 
ACT ABS EXI EXI 
come back 
CON EXI EXI EXI 
speak 
EXI EXI CON EXI 
speak 
EXI EXI ACT \[ EXI 
comfort 
EXI EXI EXI I ACT 
look at a clock 
EXI EXI EXI ACT 
go out 
EXI EXI EXI I ABS 
We build an existence/action map by the following 
procedure. 
s tep  0 Step 1 through step 3 are applied sequen- 
tially for scene directions in a sentence by sen- 
tence manner. 
s tep  1 A sentence of scene directions is analyzed 
with the Japanese morphological analyzer JU- 
MAN(Matsumoto et. al , 1992) to segment a 
sentence into a sequence of word accompanied 
by part of speech tags. 
s tep  2 The subject and predicate of sentence are 
extracted using rule 1 through 8. 
s tep  3 For each player the value of sub-scene, 
namely, ABS, EXI, CON or ACT, is inferred 
with rule 9 through 12. 
We did build existence/action maps for scene di- 
rections of five Japanese dramas. These include a 
suspense drama, a home drama, a love story, a school 
life drama, and a comedy drama. Each drama lasts 
one hour ( including CM time). The number of the 
sentence we analyze is 1272. The first results which 
are shown in the table 2 are the rates that step 1 
/ 
56 H. Nakagawa, Y. Yaginuma and M. Sakauchi 
and 2 correctly extract subjects and predicates. We 
use not a parser which is based on phrase structure 
rules but a simple pattern matching based on rule 1 
through 8. Nevertheless these results indicate that 
our rules for extracting subjects and predicates work 
quite well. 
that even though our natural anguage analysis sys- 
tem employs a shallow understanding mechanism 
which is easily implemented with today's NLP tech- 
nologies, it works very well for scene directions. This 
is a very limited area but useful for scene retrieval 
system, which is a promising application of multi- 
media information retrieval. 
Table 2: Rate of correctly extracted subjects and 
predicates 
drama 1 
drama 2 
drama 3 
drama 4 
drama 5 
correct subjects 
94.9% 
82.4% 
85.8% 
75.7% 
83.1% 
correct predicates 
98.7% 
93.1% 
94.8% 
94.9% 
97.2% 
The main reason of failing to extract a subject is 
the failure of inferring the referent of zero subject. 
The almost all reasons of failing predicate xtraction 
is the failure of morphological nalyzer. 
The next results we show are the accuracy of our 
existence/action map. The key factor for scene re- 
trieval is whether a specific player appears on the 
scene or not. Therefore we focus on how accurately 
existences and absences, namely EXIs and ABSs, are 
inferred. We estimate this with recall and precision 
rates defined as follows. 
#CI  
recall - #C 
~CI 
precision -- #i 
where ~CI,  #I ,  and #I  means "number of cor- 
rectly inferred cases in the map by our rules", "num- 
ber of cases to be correctly inferred" , and "number 
of all cases inferred by our rules" , respectively. The 
results are shown in table 3, and they are extremely 
encouraging ones. 
Table 3: 
maps 
Recall and precision of existence/action 
Recall Precision 
drama 1 86.7% 97.8% 
drama 2 73.2% 96.8% 
drama 3 91.7% 91.7% 
drama 4 87.9% 93.5% 
drama 5 77.2% 94.4% 
Our rules derived based on semantics of "-tekuru" 
and "-teiku" are proven to work correctly in almost 
all cases. The remarkable point in these results is 
4 Scene Retrieval System 
We develop the scene retrieval system for drama 
scenes based on an existence/action map. A sub- 
scene is a unit of retrieval because players on the 
scene change in a sub-scene by sub-scene manner as 
you see in an existence/action map. Therefore we 
have to find the correspondence b tween a sub-scene 
and a set of real image frames. The multimedia data 
we have consist of 1) a sequence of image frames, 2) 
audio track data, and 3) script of drama including 
scene directions. The temporal correspondence, or 
in other words synchronization, of these three types 
of media data is calculated with DP matching tech- 
nique we have already developed(Yaginuma, 1993). 
Owing to these correspondences, we identify each set 
of frames that corresponds to the each part of dialog. 
Then we regard a set of sequential frames between 
two adjacent lines of dialog as the sub-scene corre- 
sponding to the scene direction. 
Based on these structures holding among image 
frames and sub-scene, we can retrieve an image 
frame that corresponds to a query, by the following 
procedure. 
1. Input a query that consists of the time, location, 
player's name and her/his action. 
2. Search the sub-scene that matches the condi- 
tion stated in the input query using the exis- 
tence/action map. 
3. Extract a set of frame which correspond to the 
searched sub-scene, and display them on the im- 
age screen of user's GUI. 
Our system uses Netscape Navigator as a GUI. 
The retrieval system is implemented as JAVA ap- 
plets which work as a CGI. The following figures are 
screen images of GUI of our scene retrieval system. 
Figure 2 is an introductory screen of GUI of our 
scene retrieval system. In it, introductory scenes of 
drama videos are displayed in every track. 
Figure 3 is a screen in which several input forms 
are shown. Dousanushi('agent' in English) in- 
put form indicates a list of the players' name, 
from which we select one of the names. Then 
scenes in which the player of the selected name 
exists is searched. Basho(meaning 'location') and 
3ikoku(meaning 'time') input forms indicate the 
list of locations and the list of times, from which 
we select one value for each as query terms. 
Dousa(meaning 'action') input form indicates the 
list of verbs. If we select one of them, it comes to be a 
Scene Direction Based Reference in Drama Scenes 57 
Figure 2: Introductory screen of GUI 
Figure 3: Forms for query input 
term of the whole query, and specifys a verb appear- 
ing in the existence/action map. In Keywordl and 
Keyword2 input forms we can write other keywords 
of retrieval condition. All these inputs are combined 
together to be used as one query. Then the retrieval 
system seeks scenes that meet al these conditions in 
the query by consulting the existence/action map. 
Figure 4 is the result of retrieval. In the upper 
area, the contents of the query are shown. In the 
middle area, retrieved scenes are displayed. In the 
bottom area, track number that corresponds to the 
retrived rama scenes is shown. In this example, the 
query is as follows: player's name is "Yasuura", the 
action is "kuru('come')", the location and time are 
not specified, and no keywords are given. Then the 
player whose role name is Yasuura appears in all the 
retrieved scenes, and he is surely approaching to the 
camera in all of the retrieved scenes. Namely the 
system successfully retrieves the scenes that meet 
the query. 
Figure 4: The retrieved scenes by the query input of 
Figure 3 
5 Conc lud ing  Remarks  
In this paper, we analyze sentences used as the scene 
direction, and classify them. Then we propose the 
rules to extract subjects and predicates from them. 
With the extracted subjects and predicates, we build 
the existence/action map that shows the situations 
happening on each scene. The existence/action map 
we build describes scenes very correctly, namely the 
recall is around 80% and the precision is over 90%. 
This means that our system of inferring reference 
relations works well for scene directions. Then we 
develop the scene retrieval system in which this map 
is used to retrieve scenes from the input query. We 
also show some experimental results of retrieval. 
Our system is based on very simple linguistic 
rules. Therefore we expect hat it is possible to im- 
prove the quality of retrieval by hiring more rules. 
However more sophisticated linguistic rules and pro- 
cessing mechanism are the open problem. 
6 Acknowledgements 
This work is supported in part by the Grant-in-Aid 
for Creative Basic Research: Multi Media Mediation 
Mechanism, of the Ministry of Education, Science, 
Sports and Culture, Japan. 
References 
Susan Brennan, Marilyn Walker Friedman and Carl 
Pollard. 1987. A Centering Approach to Pro- 
nouns. In Proceedings of25th Annual Meeting of 
ACL. pages 155-162. 
IPA. 1992. Dictionary for Computer of Basic 
Japanese Verbs(IPAL). Japan Information Pro- 
motion Association, Tokyo. 
58 H. Nakagawa, Y. Yaginuma nd M. Sakauchi 
Megumi Kameyama. 1988. Zero Pronominal Bind- 
ing: Where Syntax and Discourse Meet. In 
W. Poser, editors,Japanese Syntax, pages 47-73, 
CSLI, Stanford, CA. 
Susumu Kuno. 1978. Danwa no Punpoo (Syntax of 
Discourse). Taishuukan, Tokyo. 
Y. Matsumoto and S. Kurohashi and T. Utsuro and 
H. Taeki and M. Nagao. 1992. User's Manual of 
Japanese Morphological Analyzer: JUMAN ver- 
sion 2.0. Kyoto University, Kyoto. 
Marilyn Walker and Masayo Iida and Sharon Cote. 
1994. Japanese Discourse and the Process of Cen- 
tering. Computational Linguistics, 20-2, pages 
193-232. 
Yoshitomo Yaginuma and Masao Sakauchi. 1993. 
Moving TV Image Analysis Based on Multimedia 
Fusion Focusing on Extracted Common Concepts. 
The proceedings of IEEE International Conference 
on Industrial Electronics'93, IEEE. 
