I 
Us ing  NLP  in the  des ign  of a conversat ion  aid for non-speak ing  
ch i ld ren  
Portia File 
School of Informatics 
University of Abertay Dundee 
Bell Street, Dundee DD1 1HG 
Scotland, UK 
p. fi le~tay, ac.uk 
Leona Elder 
School of Social and Health Sciences 
University of Abertay Dundee 
Bell Street, Dundee DD1 1HG 
Scotland, UK 
i. elder@ray, ac. uk 
Abstract  
It is difficult to develop an effective 
computer-based aid to enable children 
whose speech is hard to understand to par- 
ticipate in social conversations. Such chil- 
dren require a relatively simple device that 
will enable them to select and produce suit- 
able content for a conversation i real time. 
We are investigating how an analysis of 
children's language can be used in the de- 
sign of such a device. In particular, we be- 
lieve that an analysis of the pragmatics of 
children's conversations will provide a ba- 
sis for predicting from a corpus of plausi- 
ble utterances those utterances that will be 
most useful for a particular child. Such 
an analysis may also be useful for subse- 
quently predicting and locating which of 
these pre-loaded utterances i likely to be 
required next during a particular conver- 
sation. In addition, we are interested in 
using computer-based training for the aid. 
Given that all of the child's speech will be 
produced through the computer-based aid, 
it may be possible to provide intelligent in- 
teractive training. 
1 Introduction 
Children who cannot speak tend to be socially iso- 
lated from their peers. We are currently developing 
a computer-based device, called PICTALK, to sup- 
port their casual conversation and hence their so- 
cial development. Because the system is intended 
for children, we need careful control of the cognitive 
demands made on the system's users. We wish to 
investigate how the methods developed in NLP re- 
search can be used to improve the effectiveness of
PICTALK in supporting the conversations of these 
users without increasing its complexity. 
The PICTALK system (File et al, 1995a); (File 
et al, 1995b) is intended to support he casual con- 
versation of people who can neither 4ad nor speak. 
It is based on the TALK system (Todman, Aim, and 
Elder, 1994a) for people who can read but who are 
not able to speak. With PICTALK, pictures and 
labels are used to indicate the content of utterances 
that the user can choose to speak (using a speech 
synthesiser). Content utterances are stored within 
an organisational framework (provided for the user) 
that is designed to enable their prompt retrieval in 
'real-time' conversations. The content available to 
a PICTALK user is very limited for two reasons. 
First, each PICTALK screen has few items or 'but- 
tons' available because ach picture takes up quite a 
bit of space. Further, the number of screens that can 
be accessed by a user using the organisational frame- 
work is restricted by the need to limit the complexity 
of the system to that suitable for someone who is ei- 
ther very young or who has learning difficulties. It 
is important to use any methods we can, e.g. predic- 
tive methods, that will reduce the cognitive load on 
the user or that will allow the user effective access 
to a larger set of utterances. 
The content of informal conversational exchange 
is often subordinate to its social aspects. Therefore, 
our emphasis on casual conversation leads us to focus 
more on supporting those social aspects of conversa- 
tion rather than on the delivery of information. Our 
principal goal is to allow the system's users and their 
conversational partners, working together, to have 
pleasant social interactions. To achieve this goal, 
we are examining the pragmatic structures of chil- 
dren's successful unaided conversations and would 
like to use the relationships between these structures 
to predict content. 
43 
2 The  pragmat ics  o f  ch i ld ren 's  
conversat ions  
McTear (McTear, 1985) has examined the pragmat- 
ics of children's conversations. The main pragmatic 
structures he notes are: greetings, initiations, at- 
tention getting, attention directing, conversation re- 
pair e.g. repeating an utterance or requesting or re- 
sponding to a need for clarification, and use of dis- 
course connectors for topic shift or to continue the 
conversation after repair and to signal turntaking. 
'Ihrntaking exchanges can be to initiate, respond, 
follow-up or conduct a simultaneous response with 
initiation (e.g. "Is it in the cupboard" in response to 
"where is it?"). Even young children use verbal and 
non-verbal means to accomplish these activities as 
well as changes in prosody and variations in polite- 
ness depending on the partner. We are interested 
in investigating ways in which we can assist children 
in carrying out these activities by using prediction 
within PICTALK's organisation structure to reduce 
the complexity of the process required for finding the 
next appropriate utterance. 
3 P ICTALK fo r  Ch i ld ren  
PICTALK has many features that support he above 
activities. These include the use of pre-loaded text, a 
menu controlled organisational structure that mod- 
els conversation flow and additional items specifi- 
cally designed to keep the flow of conversation going. 
There may be a potential for NLP to contribute to 
the enhancement of these and other aspects of the 
PICTALK system. 
3.1 The  role of  p re - loaded ut terances  in 
P ICTALK 
The PICTALK system allows the user to pre-load 
potential conversation fragments that may be useful 
in some future conversational interaction. The sub- 
stantive content of these fragments may be input 
with a particular interaction and a specific conver- 
Sational partner in mind or it may be more general 
for use with any of a number of potential partners. 
This pre-loading process may be very slow but it can 
be carried out whenever the user has time to do it 
and under circumstances when there will certainly 
be much less time pressure than during actual con- 
versation. The intention is that the user will be able 
to access these pre-loaded utterances quickly during 
the conversation. Such rapid access is likely to be 
very important in social conversation. Experience 
with the TALK system (Todman and Lewins, 1996) 
suggests that the rate of conversation has a strong 
positive relationship with the ratings of satisfaction 
made both by a TALK user and by her conversation 
partners. 
Pre-loaded utterances currently have to be con- 
structed by someone other than the PICTALK user 
Each of these utterances needs to be considered very 
carefully for several reasons. First, PICTALK holds 
very few (typically two dozen) utterances. As al- 
ready mentioned, this is partly because few pictures 
can be accommodated on a fixed size of computer 
screen. Additionally, it is important hat the cog- 
nitive demands made of PICTALK be limited and, 
therefore, the number of possible decisions that are 
required in order to select utterances must also be 
limited. Finally, PICTALK users are likely to have 
difficulty deciding how to make the conversation flow 
when the utterance they would like to use is not 
available. 
3.2 Selecting pre-loaded utterances 
It is generally considered highly desirable to allow 
people with disabilities to be as independent as pos- 
sible. In this context, it would be desirable to allow 
PICTALK users to take more control over the con- 
tent of their social interactions. Though at present 
utterances are developed and pre-loaded by some- 
one other than the PICTALK user, the PICTALK 
system has a facility to allow the end user to  se- 
lect from a database of those available utterances 
and their associated pictures. Because the associa- 
tion between picture and utterances i  imprecise, the 
user will need to experiment with the available items 
to see what speech is associated with each available 
picture before deciding whether to load an item into 
their PICTALK system. It would be helpful to offer 
first the items that are most likely to be appropri- 
ate. A wide range of conversation attributes could 
be used to predict the most appropriate utterance, 
e.g. the anticipated conversation partner, phrases e- 
lected for similar conversation partners, content re- 
lated to the last phrase selected. Even a fairly small 
database of additional items with individually se- 
lected and stored attributes could offer benefits to 
these users. 
3.3 Supporting variations in conversational 
style 
At present it may be possible to support some varia- 
tions in conversational style as a function of who the 
conversational partner is (e.g. peer, teacher). The 
simple solution is to address this problem when ut- 
terances are constructed for the user with a particu- 
lar conversation partner in mind or when utterances 
are selected uring a conversation. For example, in 
PICTALK variations in style can be expressed in the 
44 
I 
four utterances that are available to open a conver- 
sation (e.g. hiya; howdy; hello ) and the four other 
utterances that are available to close a conversation 
(see you later; goodbye; see ya ). It may be possible 
to provide more general support for variation in style 
either by picking up the cue to style from the opening 
utterance selected and then using the corresponding 
variation of each subsequent u terance selected or by 
offering suitable prediction when the user selects ma- 
terial from a database of utterances in preparation 
for an interaction with a particular class of conversa- 
tion partner e.g. polite style for adult, more informal 
style for classmate. 
3.4 Accessing material through the 
organisational structure 
Most of the utterances available to the PICTALK 
user are organised in a shallow menu structure. 
There is a hello menu button to give access to 
greeting utterances, a goodbye menu button to give 
access to closing utterances and most of the re- 
maining content is accessed through a set of 3 in- 
tersecting perspectives, namely, person with 2 val- 
ues: me and you; tense with 2 values: past and 
present/future and affect with two values: happy 
and sad. By selecting one each of these three per- 
spectives, the user gets access to pre-loaded content 
appropriate to that combined perspective e.g. con- 
tent on something I like doing (me/present/happy). 
These perspectives are designed to support the 
flow of conversation and require only one button 
press to move from phrases about what I disliked 
(me/past/sad) to phrases about what you disliked 
(you/past/sad) or from phrases about what I liked 
(me/past/happy) to phrases about what I would like 
(me/present/happy). With similar features, TALK 
has been shown to support its users in initiating con- 
versation topics and in turn-taking in the Question- 
Answer format (Todman et al, 1994b). Unfortu- 
nately, our experience with PICTALK users uggests 
that this menu structure is very difficult for them to 
understand. It may, however, be possible to sup- 
port the PICTALK user by predicting and suggest- 
ing suitable utterances during a conversation. 
From McTear's (McTear, 1985) work, it seems 
plausible that children may be able to recognise a
suitable utterance (identified by its associated pic- 
ture) as appropriate if it were suggested, even if they 
are unable to recall and locate it. Though it would 
be difficult to implement, a modestly effective pre- 
diction system could reduce the cognitive load on the 
PICTALK user. Such a prediction system may be 
easier for children than for adults. Some theorists, 
notably, of course, Piaget (Piaget, 1959), have sug- 
gested that children are more egocentric than adults 
in all aspects of social relationships including con- 
versations, by which it is usually taken to mean that 
they respond less to the listener's perspective. While 
later work has suggested that the level of egocen- 
trism which is in general exhibited by young children 
may not be as great as suggested by Piaget e.g. (Sel- 
man, 1980) nevertheless the ability to make this type 
of social adaptation is not fully developed for some 
years and therefore children may be less responsive 
to their partners (McTear, 1985). This may have 
the fortuitous consequence that the child's next ut- 
terance depends more on the child's last utterance, 
which is known by the system, rather than on the 
partner's last utterance, which is not known. 
3.5 Keeping the conversation flowing 
PICTALK provides a few other utterances that are 
outside of the menu structure and are always avail- 
able. The utterances are intended to support he 
goal of maintaining conversational flow when a suit- 
able specific response to something a partner says is 
not available and fulfil general pragmatic functions 
such as initiation to get attention, e.g. "Hey!", re- 
pair when something has gone wrong, e.g. "OOPS" 
or "What?" or "I don't have anything to say to that" 
and discourse connection to signal a topic shift, e.g. 
"Now, right". Utterances can also be available sup- 
port the speaking conversation partner. In using the 
TALK system, we have found that keeping the part- 
ner informed in some way is reassuring and helpful. 
They need to know, for instance, that a longer than 
usual silence is not signalling the termination of the 
interaction and this can be achieved through the in- 
clusion of such utterances as "hang on. I need to 
find what I want to say". It may be that some of 
these may be automated. For example, it might be 
possible for the PICTALK system to recognise that 
its user is searching for something to say when con: 
secutive menu presses are made or even to recognise 
that a topic shift is being initiated when the utter- 
ance just selected iffers greatly in semantic ontent 
from the previous utterance. 
3.6 Training 
Children who have no speech or whose speech is 
so impaired that they cannot be readily understood 
may not have had opportunities to develop a famil- 
iarity with the structure and pragmatics ofconversa- 
tional interactions or the skills required to maintain 
them. They also need considerable training to use 
the PICTALK system effectively. Therefore, we are 
developing a training system to help such children 
develop their conversation skills with PICTALK. In 
45 
the training system, the computer, using one speech 
synthesised voice, converses with the child, using an- 
other speech synthesised voice. At present the script 
for the computer is entirely pre-programmed. It
might be possible to introduce intelligence into the 
script to allow the computer to respond appropri- 
ately to a wider range of user's contributions. Such 
a system should make it easier to retain the child's 
interest during the rather long training period. Be- 
cause each of the child's responses i known to the 
system and is predictably limited to those available 
in PICTALK, it might be possible for the computer 
to converse fairly naturally with the child. 
4 Cur rent  research  
At present we are carrying out a preliminary inves- 
tigation of the use of NLP to support the use of 
PICTALK by children working in structured settings 
to achieve the following: 
? Analyse the pragmatic features of children's 
conversation i  a particular setting e.g. a struc- 
tured news setting. 
? Analyse the variability in the features used by 
different children in the setting and eventually 
by the same children in different settings. Try 
to associate different conversational styles with 
different utterances for later use in predicting 
which utterances will be appropriate. 
? Use these analyses to develop a corpus of plau- 
sible utterances together with an indication of 
which features are likely to be most helpful for 
children with different conversational styles or 
in different conversational settings. 
? Use the utterance f atures to predict which ut- 
terances will be useful in the chosen setting and 
to help individual children to select utterances 
from the corpus to include in PICTALK for use 
in the setting. 
? Use the analysis to see if there is any scope for 
the prediction or automatic insertion of utter- 
ances during a conversation. 
? Use artificial intelligence to script PICTALK 
training conversations. 
Portia File, John Todman, Norman Aim, Leona El- 
der, and Hilary Smith. 1995b. Adapting a Con- 
versation Aid for Non-Speaking People (TALK) to 
the Needs of Non- Reading, Non-Speaking People 
(PICTALK). In Proceedings European Conference 
on the Advancement of Rehabilitation Technology, 
pages 158-160. 
Michael McTear. 1985. Children's Conversations. 
Blackwell, Oxford, England. 
Jean Piaget. 1959. The Language and Thought of 
the Child, 3rd edition. Routledge, London, Eng- 
land. 
R.L. Selman. 1980. The Growth of Interpersonal 
Understanding, Academic Press, New York. 
John Todman, Norman Aim, and Leona Elder. 
1994a. Computer-aided conversation: a prototype 
system for non-speaking people with physical dis- 
abilities. Applied Psycholinguistics, 15:45-73. 
John Todman, Leona Elder, Norman Aim, and Por- 
tia File. 1994b. Sequential Dependencies in
Computer-Aided Conversation. Journal of Prag- 
matics, 21:141-169. 
John Todman, Elizabeth Lewins, Portia File, Nor- 
man Alm, and Leona Elder. 1995. Use of a Com- 
munication Aid (TALK) by a Non-speaking Per- 
son with Cerebral Palsy, Communication Matters, 
9:18-25. 
John Todman and Elizabeth Lewins. 1996. Use of 
an AAC system for casual conversation. In Pro- 
ceedings 7th Biennial Conference of the Interna- 
tional Society for Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication, pages 167-168. 
Re ferences  
Portia File, John Todman, Norman Alm, Leona El- 
der, and Hilary Smith. 1995a. PICTALK; A con- 
versation aid for nonspeaking, nonreading people. 
Journal of Rehabilitation Sciences, 8:47. 
46 
