Performance Measures for the Next Generation of Spoken 
Natural Language Dialog Systems 
Ronn ie  W.  Smi th  
Department  of Mathemat ics  
Computer  Science Subarea 
East Carol ina University 
Greenvil le, NC 27858, USA 
rws?cs,  ecu. edu 
1 Improved  Per fo rmance  in Spoken 
Natura l  Language D ia log  Systems 
Since approximately the mid 1980's, technology 
has been adequate (if not ideal) for researchers to 
construct spoken natural anguage dialog systems 
(SNLDS) in order to test theories of natural an- 
guage processing and to see what machines were ca- 
pable of based on current echnological limits. Over 
the course of time, a few systems have been con- 
structed in sufficient detail and robustness to enable 
some evaluation of the systems. For the most part, 
these systems were greatly limited by the available 
speech recognition technology. Continuous peech 
systems required speaker dependent training and re- 
stricted vocabularies, but still had such a large num- 
ber of misrecognitions that this tended to be the 
limiting factor in the success of the system. For ex- 
ample, testing in 1991 of the Circuit Fix-It Shop of 
(Smith, Hipp, and Biermann, 1995) required an ex- 
perimenter to remain in the room in order to notify 
the user when misrecognitions occurred. 
Fortunately, speech recognition capabilities are 
improving, and systems are being constructed that 
allow individuals to walk up and use them after a 
brief orientation. One example is the TRAINS sys- 
tem of (Allen et al, 1995) that was demonstrated 
at the 1995 ACL conference, where people just sat 
down and used the system after a brief set of in- 
structions were given to them by the demonstrator. 
Another example is the current system under devel- 
opment at Duke University that serves as a tutor 
for liberal arts students learning the basics of Pascal 
programming. In this system, the machine itself ex- 
plains how to use it. More thorough and challenging 
methods of evaluation are now feasible. This paper 
proposes ome measures for evaluation based on a 
retrospective look at measures used in the past, an- 
alyzing their relevance in today's environment. 
For the future, expect measurements of speech 
recognition performance and basic utterance under- 
standing to remain important, but there should also 
be more emphasis on measuring robustness and mea- 
suring the utility of domain-independent k owledge 
about dialog. Furthermore, we should expect real- 
time response from evaluated systems, a sharp re- 
duction in the amount of specialized training for us- 
ing systems, and the use of longitudinal studies to 
see how user behavior evolves. 
2 Fundamenta ls  in  Eva luat ion  
2.1 Linguistic Coverage 
A forward looking view of evaluation is offered by 
(Whittaker and Stenton, 1989). It is forward look- 
ing in the sense that they investigated issues in eval- 
uation independent ofbuilding a system. Their per- 
spective was not based on a specific SNLDS, but 
a general analysis of the issue of evaluation. Their 
main point was that evaluation eeded to be placed 
within the context of a system's use. Consequently, 
they used a Wizard of Oz study in an information 
retrieval environment (e.g., database query) in or- 
der to identify the types of natural anguage inputs 
a typical user would use in order to gain access to 
needed information. Their analysis identified the fol- 
lowing requirements for the linguistic overage of a 
dialog system in the information retrieval environ- 
ment: (1) operators for specifying the properties of 
the set of objects for which information would be 
requested; (2) contextual references; and (3) refer- 
ences to the actual source of information (e.g., the 
database). In general, linguistic overage of SNLDS 
in the past has been limited, and to the extent 
that limitations will exist in the next generation of 
SNLDS, such limitations need to be measured and 
described. 
2.2 Early System Performance Measures 
(Biermann, Fineman, and Heidlage, 1992) report on 
the results of testing their VIPX system of the mid 
1980's which offers users the ability to display and 
37 
manipulate text on a computer terminal using spo- 
ken English supported by touches of the screen. The 
main dimensions which they evaluated were: (1) 
Learnability, (2) Correctness, (3) Timing, and (4) 
User Response. Learnability measures how easily 
subjects could learn to communicate with the ma- 
chine. Correctness measures whether or not there 
was successful completion of the task. Timing de- 
scribes the rate at which work was completed. User 
response measures how users felt about using the 
system. 
These general categories of performance measures 
can be broken down into more precisely defined and 
quantifiable measures. Information on learnability 
and user response can be elicited via a subject sur- 
vey and through comparison to alternative forms of 
user interface for completing the same task (e.g., dis- 
crete speech versus continuous speech, keyboard vs. 
speech input, and speech vs. multimodal input). In 
the next section we examine some of the measures 
relevant o correctness and timing and discuss their 
relevance for future evaluation of SNLDS. 
3 Measures  o f  Cor rec tness  and  
T iming :  Pas t ,  P resent ,  and  Future  
3.1 Recognit ion Rate  
This measure has been expressed in a variety of 
ways. Its purpose is to describe the performance of
the speech recognition component in terms of how 
accurately it converts the speech signal into the ac- 
tual words uttered. Recognition rate and the overall 
success rate of the interaction are invariably highly 
correlated. This measure is still relevant. While 
recognition technology is improving, it is not per- 
fect. In particular, telephone interactions provide 
a very challenging environment for speech recogni- 
tion equipment. For the Dialogos ystem which an- 
swers inquiries about Italian Railway train sched- 
ules, (Billi, Castagneri, and Danieli, 1996) report 
only 68.2% word accuracy for the system in 96 di- 
alogs. In spite of this Dialogos still understood 
81.6% of all sentences, a promising result. As sys- 
tems are tested in more challenging environments, 
the base level accuracy of the input signal remains 
an important benchmark in measuring system per- 
formance. 
3.2 Perplexi ty 
This measure is used to describe the amount of 
search that a speech recognition component must 
do in translating the input signal. The MINDS 
system of (Young et al, 1989) and the TINA sys- 
tem of (Seneff, 1992) represent speech systems that 
made use of various techniques for reducing the per- 
plexity faced by the speech recognition component. 
TINA used probabilistic networks and semantic fil- 
tering to reduce perplexity. MINDS used predictions 
based on dialog context o reduce perplexity. While 
not a specific measure of a dialog system, an inte- 
grated dialog system such as MINDS can provide 
information that can reduce the perplexity that the 
speech recognition component must deal with. Con- 
sequently, comparative measures of perplexity with 
and without context-dependent predictions remain 
a valid measure for evaluating the performance of 
a dialog system, particularly in a complex linguistic 
environment where reduction of perplexity is essen- 
tial for good speech recognizer performance. 
3.3 Correct ly Understood 
Ut terances /Correct ly  Processed 
Queries 
This measures how well a system processed utter- 
ances in isolation, but does not give the complete 
picture of system performance in a dialog where ut- 
terances are related through context. As the envi- 
ronments in which systems are tested become more 
challenging, the ability to handle partially under- 
stood utterances will be important. Measures for 
capturing the rate of success in situations where ut- 
terances are partially understood or perhaps even 
completely misunderstood are needed. Such mea- 
sures must take the overall dialog context into ac- 
count. One such measure has been proposed by 
(Danieli and Gerbino, 1995). They define the no- 
tion of "Implicit Recovery" (IR) as a measure of 
the ability of a system to filter the output of the 
parser and interpret it using contextual knowledge. 
In particular, an implicit recovery occurs when the 
system only partially understands an utterance, but 
still responds in an appropriate fashion, They also 
define what it means for a response to be appropri- 
ate within the context of an information retrieval 
situation. There is still a need for such definitions 
in a task assistance environment. 
3.4 System Response Times 
This measure was used in order to demonstrate 
the practical viability of systems/techniques when 
"the hardware gets faster." For the most part, 
near real-time performance was the best result ob- 
tained. However, as (Oviatt and Cohen, 1989) cau- 
tion, speakers expect fast response times in a system 
that provides poken interaction. If one expects to 
evaluate human-computer spoken language interac- 
tion, one will need a system that can give the quick 
responses that people normally expect in spoken in- 
38 
teraction. It is hoped in the next generation ofmea- 
suring SNLDS, system response time will no longer 
be a required measure, as systems will perform with 
real-time speed and not continually have awkward 
delays that break up the flow of the dialog. 
3.5 Durat ion of  the Interact ion 
An overall measure specifying how long it takes a 
user to complete the interaction, it provides a gross 
measure that can indicate interactional differences 
under different conditions, such as the level of sys- 
tem initiative ((Smith, Hipp, and Biermann, 1995)). 
Another way in which this is used is in compar- 
ing the efficiency of natural language interaction to 
other modes of communication that could be used 
for the given task. For example, (Biermann, Fine- 
man, and Heidlage, 1992) as part of their overall 
evaluation of their voice and touch-driven text edi- 
tor compare the time it takes to execute commands 
with their system to the time it takes people to com- 
plete the commands using the vi text editor. Com- 
paring the speed at which someone can obtain infor- 
mation over the telephone by using a speech-based 
interface as opposed to the ubiquitous touch-tone in- 
terface with exhausting menu hierarchies that most 
businesses have (this seems to be true of businesses 
in the United States) might be very illuminating in- 
deed! 
3.6 Overall Interact ion Success 
This measures whether or not the interaction was 
successful (i.e., was the desired information ob- 
tained, or the required task completed?). Given 
the unfortunate circumstance that for the foresee- 
able future, some interactions will fail, this measure 
remains necessary. And if all interactions were suc- 
cessful, we might believe that the task was simply 
not challenging enough! 
3.7 Frequency of System Fai lure/Error  
The earliest systems were prone to frequent hard- 
ware and software failures. Robustness was mea- 
sured in terms of how infrequently a system crashed. 
In other circumstances, system failure might be cast 
as "user error", because the user did not follow the 
allowed syntax or else spoke a word that was not in 
the recognizers vocabulary. As the state of the art 
progresses ystem errors are evolving into inappro- 
priate responses rather than total system failure. It 
is hoped that system failure will disappear and be 
replaced by system robustness, that is, a measure of 
how well a system responds in error situations, either 
because of misunderstandings by itself, or because of 
misstatements by the human user. 
4 New I ssues  in Eva luat ion  
4.1 A Reduction in the Training Regimen 
Due to their brittle nature and the limits of speech 
recognition technology, rigorous experimental evalu- 
ation of systems required extensive training by sub- 
jects before testing began. This training involved 
recording of voice patterns for speaker-dependent 
speech recognition as well as training on the re- 
stricted vocabulary and syntax that systems re- 
quired. Thus, as reported in (Smith and Hipp, 
1994) for the Circuit Fix-It Shop much care had to 
be taken to get users to speak somewhat naturally, 
while still remaining within the linguistic coverage 
capabilities of the system. In the future, we hope 
that such restrictions will not be necessary, or at 
the very least, be greatly lessened. 
Speaker-independent continuous peech recogni- 
tion technology is now available, so the amount of 
time required to enable a person to interact with an 
SNLDS is much less. As mentioned previously, the 
TRAINS system demoed at ACL 1995 did not re- 
quire any particular training other than being told 
the task you were trying to complete, being given a 
brief description of the screen layout on the console 
you were viewing, and the encouragement to alk to 
the machine like you would talk to a human assis- 
tant. On the other hand, they were using the system 
in a "data collection" mode at that point rather than 
in a formal experimental evaluation of the system. 
Depending on the nature of the task, the amount of 
training required will be varied and still needs to be 
reported. Care must be taken in any training not 
to overly bias the type of linguistic behavior that 
users will exhibit, if claims of general capability and 
robustness are to be validated. 
4.2 Measuring the Uti l i ty of 
Domain- Independent  I format ion 
SNLDS cannot succeed without a strong base of do- 
main knowledge. Nevertheless, if our main research 
focus is on our theories of natural language process- 
ing, we would like to justify our theory by showing 
how well it performs. One way to capture this would 
be the development of measures that show the util- 
ity of domain-independent dialog knowledge as com- 
pared to domain-specific information which a system 
contains. For example, some inputs to the system 
will be contextually self-contained (e.g., "The red 
switch is in the off position" when there is only one 
red switch in the domain), while other inputs require 
the use of dialog knowledge to be understood. When 
reporting the percentage ofutterances correctly un- 
derstood, it may be illuminating to report the cause 
39 
of the utterances not understood--is t because of 
a lack of domain knowledge, a lack of vocabulary, 
or a lack of ability at doing contextual interpreta- 
tion? Such measures can be helpful in determining 
the usefulness of a theory of dialog processing as well 
as determining future directions for research. 
5 An  Idea l i zed  V iew o f  Eva luat ion  
For the future testing of systems, I hope to see the 
following: systems that (1) interact with users in 
a complex problem-solving domain where both the 
user and system have knowledge about what prob- 
lem is being solved; (2) do not need experimenters 
to act as intermediaries between system and user as 
the system and user will be able to collaborate via 
spoken natural anguage to a successful conclusion; 
and (3) allow users to be ready to use them after 
less than five minutes of instruction. 
Due to the wide ranging motivations of funding 
agencies and the world-wide interest in SNLDS, it 
is not likely that we will find a common task for 
which everyone will implement their model of dia- 
log processing and then be able to test them all on 
a common set of problems to see which one per- 
forms better. Consequently, when reporting evalu- 
ations, a variety of measures will be needed in or- 
der to allow ones colleagues to gain an idea of the 
effectiveness of the system. These measures should 
include (1) speech recognition accuracy; (2) the util- 
ity of domain-independent k owledge about dialog; 
(3) the nature and effectiveness of system error han- 
dling; and (4) comparisons of effectiveness for mul- 
tiple interaction styles. 
Furthermore, public access to transcripts and the 
production of videotapes ofsubjects in the actual ex- 
perimental situation should also be part of the eval- 
uation framework. In environments where one may 
encounter novices, experts, or individuals with inter- 
mediate xpertise, the ability to interact in a vari- 
ety of styles becomes essential. Longitudinal studies 
with subjects in such environments are the only way 
to gain an idea of a system's success in dealing with 
such a situation. Only through careful evaluation 
and full reporting of the results can the community 
of researchers as well as the general public gain an 
understanding of the current abilities and the future 
potential of SNLDS. 
6 Acknowledgments  
This material is based upon work supported by the 
National Science Foundation under Grant No. IRI- 
9501571. 
Re ferences  
Allen, J.F., L.K. Schubert, G. Ferguson, P. Hee- 
man, C.H. Hwang, T. Kato, M. Light, N. Mar- 
tin, B. Miller, M. Poesio, and D.R. Traum. 1995. 
The TRAINS project: a case study in building 
a conversational planning agent. Journal of Ex- 
perimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 
7:7-48. 
Biermann, Alan W., Linda Fineman, and J. Francis 
Heidlage. 1992. A voice- and touch-driven atu- 
ral language ditor and its performance. Interna- 
tional Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 37:1-21. 
Billi, R., G. Castagneri, and M. Danieli. 1996. 
Field trial evaluations of two different informa- 
tion inquiry systems. In Proceeding s of the Third 
IEEE Workshop on Interactive Voice Technologies 
Telecommunications Applications. 
Danieli, Morena and Elisabetta Gerbino. 1995. 
Metrics for evaluating dialogue strategies in a spo- 
ken language system. In Proceedings of the 1995 
AAAI Spring Symposium on Empirical Methods 
in Discourse Interpretation and Generation, pages 
34-39. 
Oviatt, Sharon L. and Philip R. Cohen. 1989. The 
effects of interaction on spoken discourse. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Asso- 
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 126- 
134. 
Seneff, S. 1992. TINA: A natural anguage system 
for spoken language applications. Computational 
Linguistics, pages 61-86, March. 
Smith, R.W. and D.R. Hipp. 1994. Spoken Natural 
Language Dialog Systems: A Practical Approach. 
Oxford University Press, New York. 
Smith, R.W., D.R. Hipp, and A.W. Biermann. 1995. 
An architecture for voice dialog systems based 
on Prolog-style theorem-proving. Computational 
Linguistics , pages 281-320. 
Whittaker, Steve and Phil Stenton. 1989. User stud- 
ies and the design of natural language systems. In 
Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of the Eu- 
ropean Chapter of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, pages 116-123. 
Young, S.R., A.G. Hauptmann, W.H. Ward, E.T. 
Smith, and P. Werner. 1989. High level knowl- 
edge sources in usable speech recognition sys- 
tems. Communications of the ACM, pages 183- 
194, February. 
40 
