How far are we from (semi-) automatic annotation 
of anaphoric links in corpora? 
(From knowledge-poor pronoun resolution to a tentative look at the 
(semi-) automatic annotation of pronoun-antecedent pairs in corpora) 
Ruslan Mitkov 
School of Languages and European Studies 
University of Wolverhampton 
Stafford Street 
Wolverhampton WV 1 1 SB 
United Kingdom 
R. M i tkov@wlv .  ac. uk  
Abstract 
The paper aises for discussion a proposal for the 
semi-automatic annotation of pronoun-antecedent 
pairs in corpora. The proposal is based on robust 
knowledge-poor p onoun resolution followed by 
post-editing. 
The paper is structured as follows. The introduc- 
tion comments on the fact that automatic dentifi- 
cation of referential links in corpora has lagged 
behind in comparison with similar lexical, syn- 
tactical and even semantic tasks. The second sec- 
tion of the paper outlines the author's practical 
and robust knowledge-based approach to pro- 
noun resolution which will subsequently be put 
forward as the core of a larger architecture pro- 
posed for the automatic tagging of referential 
links. Section 3 briefly presents other related 
knowledge-poor approaches, while section 4 dis- 
cusses the limitations and advantages of the 
practical approach. The main argument of the 
paper is to be found in section 5, where we pres- 
ent the idea of developing a semi-automatic envi- 
ronment for annotating anaphoric links and out- 
line the components of such a program. Finally, 
the conclusion looks at the anticipated success 
rate of the approach. 
1. Introduction 
Annotated anaphoric links in language corpora 
play an important role in teaching and research. 
Research roles may include investigation into 
the distribution of the different types of ana- 
phors, or into the location or distance of the an- 
tecedent, and also development of rules or heu- 
ristics for anaphora resolution and the testing of 
anaphora-related hypotheses/theories on the ba- 
sis of numerous real-life examples. 
Annotation of referential links has not yet 
been able to benefit from the level of automation 
enjoyed by its lexical, syntactical and semantic 
"counterparts". Part-of-speech tagging has 
shown remarkable accuracy (99.2% see 
\[Voutilaen 95\]), robust parsing in corpora has 
delivered very good results and even word sense 
tagging has reported a considerable improve- 
ment. However, "referential tagging" has not 
been fully explored (and developed) and proba- 
bly this is due, no doubt, to the complexity of 
automatic anaphora resolution. 
One of the best known tools for anaphoric an- 
notation is XANADU - an X-windows interac- 
tive editor written by Roger Garside, which of- 
fers the user an easy-to-navigate environment 
for manually marking pairs of anaphors- 
antecedents (\[Fligelstone 92\]). Manual annota- 
tion, however, imposes a considerable demand 
on human time and labour. 
In this paper we put forward the idea of incor- 
porating a practical, knowledge-poor approach 
to anaphora resolution (\[Mitkov 97\]) within a 
larger architecture for rough automatic referen- 
tial annotation of corpora. At this stage our pro- 
posal deals with pronominal anaphora only and 
"rough annotation" implies that a follow-up 
manual correction would be necessary. Never- 
theless, we believe that this partial solution 
brings us somewhat closer to the automatic an- 
notation of all types of anaphoric links. 
2. Outline of our practical pronoun resolution 
approach 
With a view to avoiding complex syntactic, se- 
mantic and discourse analysis (vital for real- 
world applications), we have developed a practi- 
cal approach to pronoun resolution (\[Mitkov 
82 
97\]) which does not parse and analyse the input 
in order to identify antecedents of anaphors. It 
makes use of only a part-of-speech tagger, plus 
simple noun phrase rules (sentence constituents 
are identified at the level of noun phrase at most) 
and operates on the basis of antecedent-tracking 
preferences (referred to hereafter as "antecedent 
indicators"). 
2.1 Antecedent indicators 
Our empirical study (restricted to computer and 
hi-fi technical manuals) enabled us to develop 
efficient preferences for antecedent tracking in 
this sublanguage/genre. (We studied more than 
400 different documents which had been hand- 
annotated; referential links were marked by hu- 
man experts). These antecedent indicators are 
described in detail in \[Mitkov 97\]; we shall out- 
line here those which are most frequently used 
as a supplement to gender and number agree- 
ment. 
? Term preference 
NPs representing terms in the field are more 
likely to be the antecedent than NPs which 
are not terms (scores 1 if the NP is term and 
0 if not). 
? Verb preference 
I f  the verb is a member of the Verb_set = 
{discuss, present, illustrate, summarise, ex- 
amine, describe, define, show, check, de- 
velop, review, report, outline, consider, in- 
vestigate, explore, assess, analyse, synthe- 
sise, study, survey, deal, cover}, then con- 
sider the first NP following it as the pre- 
ferred antecedent (scores 1 and 0). 
(Empirical evidence suggests that because of 
their salience, the verbs listed above are 
particularly likely candidates) 
These two preferences can be illustrated by the 
example: 
This table shows a minimal configurationi; ti 
does not leave much room for additional ap- 
plications or other software for which you may 
require additional swap space. 
? Lexical  reiteration 
Lexically reiterated items are likely candi- 
dates for antecedent (scores 2 if the NP is 
repeated within the same paragraph twice or 
more, 1 if repeated once and 0 if not). Lexi- 
cally reiterated items include repeated syn- 
onymous noun phrases which may often be 
preceded by definite articles or demon- 
stratives. 
? Section heading preference 
If a noun phrase occurs in the heading of the 
section, part of which is the current sen- 
tence, then consider it as the preferred can- 
didate for the antecedent (1, 0). 
? Col location pattern preference 
This preference is given to candidates which 
have an identical collocation pattern with a 
pronoun. The collocation implemented here 
is restricted to the pattern "noun/pronoun, 
verb" or "verb, noun/pronoun" (2, 0). 
(owing to lack of syntactic information, this 
preference is somewhat weaker than the 
collocation preference described in \[Dagan 
& Itai 90\] and suggested subsequently in our 
procedure for semi-automatic annotation) 
Press the key i down and turn the volume up... 
Press it i again. 
? Referent ia l  d istance 
In complex sentences, noun phrases in the 
previous clause I are the best candidate for 
the antecedent of an anaphor in the subse- 
quent clause, followed by noun phrases in 
the previous sentence, then by nouns situ- 
ated 2 sentences further back and finally 
nouns 3 sentences further back (2, I, 0, -1). 
For anaphors in simple sentences, noun 
phrases in the previous sentence are the best 
candidate for antecedent, followed by noun 
phrases situated 2 sentences further back 
and finally nouns 3 sentences further back 
(1, 0,-1) 
? "Non-preposit ional"  noun phrases  
A "pure", "non-prepositional" noun phrase 
is given a higher preference than a noun 
phrase which is part of a prepositional 
phrase (0, - 1) 
Insert the cassette i into the VCR making sure it i 
is suitable for the length of recording. 
? Non-candidates  
Constituents introduced by an indefinite ar- 
ticle and constituents introduced by deter- 
miners such as "another", "other" (-1, 0) 
1 Currently we use simple heuristics for identifying clauses 
in a complex sentence 
83 
Each of the antecedent indicators is assigned a 
score with a value ~ {-1, 0, 1, 2 }. These scores 
have been determined experimentally on an 
empirical basis and are constantly being up- 
dated. Top symptoms like "lexical reiteration" 
assign score "2" whereas non-candidates are 
given a negative score of "-1". We should point 
out that the antecedent indicators are preferences 
and not absolute factors. There are cases where 
an antecedent indicator does not "point" to the 
correct antecedent. For instance, in the sentence 
"Insert the cassette into the VCR i making sure 
it i is turned on", the indicator "non-prepositional 
noun phrases" would give a "wrong" contribu- 
tion. Within the framework of all preferences 
(antecedent indicators), however, the right ante- 
cedent is still very likely to be tracked down - in 
the above example, the "non-prepositional noun 
phrases" heuristics would be overturned by the 
"collocational preference" one. 
2.2 Informal description of the algorithm 
The algorithm for pronoun disambiguation can 
be described informally as follows: 
1. Examine the current sentence and the two 
preceding sentences (if available). Look for 
noun phrases 2 only to the left Of the ana- 
phor 3 
2. Select from the noun phrases identified only 
those which agree in gender and number 4 
with the pronominal anaphor and group 
them as a set of potential candidates 
3. Apply the antecedent indicators to each po- 
tential candidate and assign scores; the 
candidate with the highest score is proposed 
as antecedent. 
For an illustration as to how the approach oper- 
ates see (\[Mitkov 97\]). 
2.3 Evaluation 
2A sentence splitter would already have segmented the text 
into sentences, a POS tagger would already have determined 
the parts of speech and a simple phrasal grammar would 
already have detected the noun phrases 
31n this project we do not t~eat cataphora; non-anaphofic "it" 
occumng in constructions such as "It is important", "It is 
necessary" is eliminated by a "referential filter" 
4Note that his restriction may not always apply in lan- 
guages other than English (e.g. German); on the other hand 
there are certain collective nouns in English which do not 
agree in number with their antecedents (e.g. "government", 
"team", parliament" etc. can be referred to "they"; equally 
some plural nouns (e.g. "data") can be referred to by "it") 
and are exempted from the agreement test 
For practical reasons, the approach presented 
does not incorporate syntactic and semantic in- 
formation (other than a list of domain terms) and 
it is not realistic to expect its performance to be 
as good as an approach which makes use of 
syntactic and semantic knowledge in terms of 
constraints and preferences. The lack of syntac- 
tic information, for instance, means giving up 
subject preference (or on other occasions object 
preference, see \[Mitkov 94a\]) which could be 
used in center tracking. Syntactic parallelism, 
useful in discriminating between identical pro- 
nouns on the basis of their syntactic function, 
also has to be forgone. Lack of semantic knowl- 
edge rules out the use of verb semantics and se- 
mantic parallelism. The preliminary evaluation, 
however, shows that less is lost than might be 
feared. 
Several documents (user's guides), with an 
overall length of 40 000 words, served as an 
initial evaluation corpus. The average success 
rate was 86%. While the test corpus contained 
the pronouns "he", "she" and "they", most pro- 
nouns were "it" (about 92%). The approach ad 
a very high success rate with sentences which 
contained one pronoun only (above 90%) but 
failed in a few paragraphs which contained an 
abundance of "it"s, 2 (or more) in a sentence, 
with "it" referring in turn to different antece- 
dents. In these examples, however, a frequent 
shift of center was observed and, in our view, 
they were not written in a natural style. 
A recent est with Computer Science textbook 
inputs showed a preliminary accuracy rate of 
above 80%. 
3. Other knowledge-poor approaches 
The approaches proposed by Nasukawa 
(\[Nasukawa 94\]), Dagan & Itai (\[Dagan & Itai 
90\]) and Kennedy & Boguraev (\[Kennedy & 
Boguraev 96\]) address anaphor esolution in a 
"knowledge-poor" way: the first approach takes 
into consideration heuristic preferences, the sec- 
ond uses frequency of collocational patterns and 
the third operates without a parser resorting to 
salience factors. 
3.1 Nasukawa's knowledge-independent 
approach 
T. Nasukawa (\[Nasukawa 94\]) describes a sim- 
ple approach which uses intersentential infor- 
mation extracted from a source text in order to 
improve the accuracy of pronoun resolution. He 
suggests that collocation patterns (modifier- 
modifee relationships) can be used to determine 
whether a candidate for antecedent can modify 
84 
the modifee of a pronoun. Nasukawa lso finds 
(similarly to (\[Mitkov 93\])) that the frequency of 
preceding noun phrases with the same lemma as 
the candidate noun phrase may be an indication 
for preference. Moreover, he suggests a heuristic 
rule favouring subjects over objects (compare 
\[Mitkov 93\] where this preference is sublan- 
guage-based). 
Each of the collocational, frequency or syn- 
tactic preferences gives its "preference value"; 
these values are eventually summed up. The 
candidate with the highest value is picked up as 
the antecedent. 
As an evaluation corpus Nasukawa uses 1904 
consecutive sentences (containing altogether 112 
third-person pronouns) from eight chapters of 
two different computer manuals. His algorithm 
handles the pronoun "it" and has been reported 
to select a correct antecedent in 93.8% of cases. 
3.2 Dagan & Itai's corpus-based approach 
I. Dagan and A. Itai (\[Dagan & Itai 90\]) report 
on a statistical approach for disambiguating 
pronouns; this is an alternative solution to the 
expensive implementation of full-scale selec- 
tional constraints knowledge. They perform an 
experiment to resolve references of the pronoun 
"it" in sentences randomly selected from the cor- 
pus. 
In their statistical model, co-occurrence pat- 
terns observed in the corpus were used as selec- 
tional patterns. Candidates for antecedent were 
substituted for the anaphor and only those can- 
didates appearing in frequent co-occurrence 
patterns were approved of. 
Dagan andi Itai report an accuracy rate of 87% 
for the sentences with genuine "it" anaphors 
(sentences in which "it" is not an anaphor have 
been manually eliminated). It should be pointed 
out that the success of this experiment depends 
on the parser used (in this case K. Jennsen's PEG 
parser). 
3.3 Kennedy & Boguraev's approach without 
a parser 
In a recent paper, Kennedy and Boguraev 
(\[Kennedy & Boguraev\]) describe an anaphor 
resolution approach which is a modified and 
extended version of that developed by Lappin 
and Leass (\[Lappin & Leass 94\]). Their system 
does not require "in-depth, full" syntactic pars- 
ing but works from the output of a part of speech 
tagger, enhanced only by annotations of gram- 
matical function of lexical items in the input text 
stream. 
The basic logic of their algorithm parallels that 
of Lappin and Leass's algorithm. The determi- 
nation of disjoint reference, however, represents 
a significant point of divergence the two. Lappin 
and Leass's relies on syntactic configurational 
information, whereas Kennedy and Boguraev's, 
in the absence of such information, relies on 
inferences from grammatical function and 
precedence. 
After the morphological and syntactic filters 
have been applied, the set of discourse referents 
that remain is subjected to a final salience 
evaluation. The candidate with highest salience 
weighting is determined to be the actual antece- 
dent; in the event of a tie, the closest candidate is
chosen. The approach works for both lexical 
anaphors (reflexives and reciprocals) and pro- 
nouns. 
Evaluation reports 75% accuracy but it should 
be pointed out that the results were obtained 
from a wide range of texts/genres: the evaluation 
was based on a random selection of genres, in- 
cluding press releases, product announcement, 
news stories, magazine articles, and other World 
Wide Web documents. 
4. Limitations and advantages of the practical 
approach 
We must admit that the practical approach as 
been tested mainly on a specific genre: computer 
and hi-fi manuals. It also appears that some of 
the rules are more genre-specific than others 
(e.g. "verb preference" and "noun preference"). 
Therefore, we cannot claim that an equally high 
level of accuracy would be guaranteed in other 
genres. 
In addition, even though our preliminary re- 
suits seem to be better than Kennedy and Bogu- 
raev's (75%), there is no ground for any real 
comparison since (i) our evaluation tests are not 
extensive nough and are of a preliminary nature 
and (ii) their evaluation is based on a random 
selection of genres, whereas our method has 
been applied to a single text genre. 
The practical approach presented has been de- 
veloped recently and is subject to further re- 
search and improvements. In particular, we plan 
to enhance the accuracy of the initial score of 
each symptom by collecting more empirical evi- 
dence and to integrate all the antecedent indica- 
tors into a uniform and comprehensive probabil- 
istic model. 
On the other hand, the main advantage of the 
practical approach lies in its independence of 
syntactic, semantic, domain and real-world 
knowledge, which makes it not only cheaper to 
implement but also appropriate for applications 
85 
in corpora. Thus we see the pronoun resolution 
approach as one of the components of a more 
general methodology aiming to offer a way for- 
ward in the automatic annotation of anaphoric 
links in corpora. 
5. Proposed methodology for semi-automatic 
annotation 
Further to our comments in section 4, we would 
like to propose the development of a semi- 
automatic procedure for annotating pronominal 
anaphora in corpora. Such a procedure would 
speed up the manual marking of pronoun- 
antecedent pairs. The semi-automatic annotation 
editor would be practically based on our pro- 
noun resolution approach made more "robust" 
by a "super" POS tagger and by corpus-based 
collocation patterns. The process of annotation 
will consist of the following stages: 
a) sentence splitting 
The first stage will be to segment the input into 
sentences by identifying their boundaries. 
b) "super"part-of-speech tagging 
We plan to use the so-called super part of speech 
taggers which (i) determine automatically exical 
categories, (ii) provide further lexical informa- 
tion (e.g. gender, number) and (iii) identify the 
syntactic function of each part-of-speech unit 
(e.g. subject, object etc.) (\[Voutilainen et al 
1992\], \[Karlsson et al 95\]). 
c) gender and number agreement 
Once the noun phrases (see footnote 2) in a sen- 
tence have been identified, agreement con- 
straints for filtering NP candidates in current and 
preceding sentences will be activated. Certain 
(e.g. collective) nouns 5 will not be subject to 
such constraints (see footnote 4). 
d) corpus-based collocation patterns 
Possible antecedents will be substituted for the 
anaphors and the frequency of the new con- 
structions will be calculated in corpora. Higher 
weightings will beassigned to NPs which occur 
more frequently in the same syntactic function 
as the anaphor (e.g. in combination with a cer- 
tain verb or subject/object). 
e) antecedent indicators 
The antecedent indicators (as described above) 
will be used for the final weighting of the candi- 
dates and for proposing the antecedent. The 
candidate with the highest overall score after 
stages d) and e) will be picked up as the most 
likely antecedent. 
We are aware of the fact that this robust pronoun 
resolver is unlikely to produce 100% accuracy. 
Therefore, we envisage the development of a 
post-editing environment. Anaphors and allo- 
cated antecedents will be highlighted with the 
user accepting or correcting them. 
If future comprehensive evaluation suggests 
that the success of the new approach is restricted 
to certain genres only, it would be worthwhile to 
consider using other knowledge-poor ap- 
proaches (e.g. \[Kennedy & Boguraev 96\]), 
which have proved their efficiency, within the 
framework suggested. 
Last but not least, another promising option 
would be to enhance the framework proposed 
with a robust parser or even better to select an 
existing robust platform for pre-processing the 
input morphologically and syntactically (one 
such platform which we are currently looking at, 
is GATE (\[Cunningham et al 96\]). 
6. Conclusion and expectations 
Lancaster University, British Telecom and Uni- 
versity of Wolverhampton are interested in set- 
ting up a project for the semi-automatic annota- 
tion of pronominal anaphora. (In addition, col- 
laboration with the University of Sheffield re- 
garding possible employment of GATE is fa- 
voured by both sides). At this stage it is difficult 
to predict he performance of our robust anaphor 
resolver, but our expectation is for a level of 
accuracy in the region of 90%. It should be 
noted that pronoun disambiguation approaches 
working exclusively on corpus-based collocation 
patterns have already reported accuracy levels of 
87% (\[Dagan & Itai 90\]), whereas our practical 
pronoun resolution approach reports a level of 
accuracy of 86%. However, we should draw 
attention to the facts that our evaluation is based 
on the use of a "standard" part-of-speech tagger 
and not a "supertagger" (which would addi- 
tionally give information on syntactic functions) 
and that we have not benefited from the output 
of a robust parser or from the highly indicative 
corpus-based syntactical patterns. If our expec- 
tation were right, limited post-editing would 
mean a considerable gain in speed compared 
with the existing manual annotation methods. 
5 We are currently preparing an exhaustive list of such 
nouns  
86 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank Atro Voutilainen and 
Marco Antonio Da Rocha for their comments on 
the position paper. 
References 
\[Cunningham et al 96\] H. Cunningham, Y. Wilks, R. 
Gaizauskas - Software infrastructure for Language 
Engineering. Proceedings of the workshop 
"Language Engineering for Document Analysis 
and Recognition", Brighton, 2 April, 1996 
\[Dagan & Itai 90\] I. Dagan, A. Itai - Automatic proc- 
esshzg of large corpora for the resolution of 
anaphora references. Proceedings of the 13th In- 
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis- 
tics, COLING'90, Heisinki, 1990 
\[Fligelstone 92\] S. Fligelstone - Developing A Scheme 
For Annotating Text To Show Anaphoric Rela- 
tions. In Leitner G (ed) Proceedings of the 1 lth 
International Conference on English Language Re- 
search on Computer Corpora. Berlin, Mouton de 
Gruyter 
\[Karlsson et al 95\] F. Karlsson, A. Voutilainen, J.
Heikkila, A. Antilla - Constraint grammar: a lan- 
guage-independent system for parsing free text. 
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, 1995 
\[Kennedy & Boguraev 96\] C. Kennedy, B. Boguraev 
- Anaphora for everyone: pronominal anaphora 
resolutionwithout a parser. Proceedings of the 
16th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics COLING'96, Copenhagen, Denmark, 
5-9 August 1996 
\[Lappin & Leass 94\] Sh. Lappin, H. Leass - An al- 
gorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution. 
Computational Linguistics, 20(4), 1994 
\[Mitkov 93\] R. Mitkov - Anaphora resolution and 
natural language understanding, Unpublished in- 
ternal report, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, 
1993 
\[Mitkov 94\] R. Mitkov- An integrated model for 
anaphora resolution. Proceedings of the 15th In- 
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis- 
tics COLING'94, Kyoto, Japan, 5-9 August 1994 
\[Mitkov 97\] Mitkov R. - Pronoun resolution: the 
practical alternative. In S. Botley, T. McEnery 
(Eds) "Discourse Anaphora nd Anaphor Resolu- 
tion". University College London Press, 1997 
\[Nasukawa 94\] T. Nasukawa - Robust method of pro- 
noun resolution usblg full-text information. Pro- 
ceedings of the 15th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics COLING'94, Kyoto, 
Japan, 5-9 August 1994 
\[Stys & Zemke 95\] M. Stys, S. Zemke - Incorporat- 
ing discourse aspects in English - Polish MT: to- 
wards robust implementation. Proceedings of the 
international conference "Recent Advances in 
Natural Language Processing", Tzigov Chark, 
Bulgaria, 14-16 September 1995 
\[Voutilainen 95\] A. Voutilainen - A syntax-based 
part-of-speech tagger. Proceedings of the 7th con- 
ference of the European Chapter of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, 1995 
\[Voutilainen etal. 92\] A. Voutilainen, J. Heikkila, A. 
Antilla - A constraint grammar of English: a per- 
formance-oriented approach. University of HEI- 
sinki, Publication No. 21, Helsinki, 1992 
87 
