A Polish-to-English Text-to-text Translation System Based on an Electronic 
Dictionary 
Krzysztof Jassem 
Dept. of Computational Linguistics and Artificial Intelligence 
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science 
Adam Mickiewicz University 
Mat ejki 48-49, 60-769 Poznan, Poland 
jassem @ math.amu.edu.pl 
POLENG is a Polish-to-English text-to-text ranslation 
system based on an electronic dictionary. The dictionary 
software enables the storing of lexical data in a finite 
automaton. The translation software uses the Arity Prolog 
interpreter in order to obtain a phrasal structure of an 
output expression. 
1 The dictionary 
The process of creating a Polish-to-English electronic 
dictionary destined to be used in computerised text trans- 
lation was performed out in the following steps: 
I. The preparatory phase. In this phase classification files 
of the inflection of Polish words as well as the coding of 
Polish and English inflection paradigms were prepared. 
2. The phase of creating the dictionary of canonical 
forms. This phase was carried out by lexicographers aimed 
by an interactive computer application. Each entry in the 
dictionary is supplied with inflection codes of its Polish 
and English parts as well as other syntactic-semantic 
information. The inflection code of the Polish part of an 
entry is a reference to a set of inflection endings tored in 
one of classification files prepared in phase 1. The format 
of the inflection code of the English part is "self- 
constructive", i.e. it enables the generation of appropriate 
inflected forms from a canonical form without he neces- 
sity of a time-consuming look up of any classification file. 
(Designing a "self-constructive" code for a highly flexional 
language like Polish would have been a complex task). 
3. The phase of generating the SGML.type dictionary of 
inflected forms. This phase is executed automatically. The 
inflected forms are generated on the basis of Polish in- 
flection codes attached to all entries in the dictionary of 
canonical forms. Only inflected forms of Polish words 
(phrases) are created in this phase. Each form inherits the 
syntactic-semantic information from its canonical form. 
English equivalents of Polish inflected forms are not 
derived. The derivation of an appropriate English form is 
left to the morphological synthesis in the translation proc- 
ess. Storing the dictionary as an SGML-type document 
aims at comfortable browsing of its contents as well as 
facilitating its use in an application other than the 
POLENG translation algorithm. 
4. Converting the dictionary into two modified finite-state 
automata. This phase is executed automatically in order to 
optimise the access time. The first automaton stores single 
words. Its alphabet coincides with the Polish orthographic 
alphabet. Reaching a terminal state of the automaton is
equivalent to finding a Polish inflected form in the dic- 
tionary. Whenever a finite state is reached, references to 
the table of morphological features and the table of ca- 
nonical forms are obtained. Due to the references, all 
morphological nd syntactic-semantic information as well 
as the canonical forms of the English equivalents of the 
found word are achieved. The second automaton stores the 
lexical phrases. The alphabet of the automaton is the set of 
identifiers of the words stored in the dictionary of single 
words. This means that the process of searching a phrase 
is executed "word by word" (in contrast to the "letter by 
letter" search in the automaton of single words). 
2 The translation algorithm 
The translation algorithm is non-modular: its only results 
are the phrasal structure and the surface form of the Eng- 
lish expression corresponding to the Polish input. The 
processes of syntactic parsing, semantic analysis, transfer 
and morphological generation are not separated. The 
grammar assumed in parsing Polish expressions consists 
mostly of DGC rules. A specific algorithm is used for 
parsing verbal phrases. The algorithm deals with a charac- 
teristic feature of Polish syntax: an almost arbitrary order 
of verb modifiers. Types and admissible orders of modifi- 
ers of a given verb are listed in the dictionary. A few 
English verbs may correspond to one Polish verb depend- 
ing on the type and the order of its modifiers. For each 
type of a modifier of a Polish verb, the type of the corre- 
sponding modifier of the English equivalent is given in the 
dictionary. The translation algorithm searches for the 
constituent verb of a clause, consults the information 
extracted from the dictionary and first checks for the 
constructions admissible for the verb. This approach en- 
ables the analysis of the Polish input expression, the 
choice of the appropriate English verb equivalent and the 
synthesis of the correct English output. If verb modifiers in 
the clause fulfil none of the types given in the dictionary 
for the predicate, then default values for the English verb 
equivalent and the English modifier types are taken. 
The algorithm makes it possible to transfer special ver- 
bal constructions called (-T) constructions and (T-shifted) 
94 
constructions, where T denotes a type of a modifier. (-T) 
constructions are used in analysing object questions and 
relative object clauses in which a modifier of the type T 
does not explicitly occur, although the type T-modifier is 
required for the verb according to the dictionary informa- 
tion (e.g. in the sentence "He is a man I was talking to" 
the object of the clause "I was talking to" appears 
"outside" the clause). The (T-shifted) constructions are 
used in analysing sentences in which an object of the 
Polish expression should be transferred into the subject of 
the English expression (e.g. the Polish.sentence: "Nie 
powiedziano mi (object) o tyro"; the English translation: 
I (subject) have not been told about hat"). 
in a Polish sentence verbs are characterised both by pre- 
and post-modifiers. However, the sequence of words 
between the subject and the predicate in a sentence is 
subject o a number of constraints and is therefore ame- 
nable to deterministic parsing. This deterministic part of 
the algorithm has a notable impact on the effectiveness of 
the translation process. 
A few heuristic methods have been developed in order 
to limit the search space and thus achieve better effi- 
ciency. The "method of filters" consists in checking 
"negative rules" first. The success of a negative rule is 
equivalent to a failure of the hypothesis. The method 
"replace by alternative" consists in replacing two rules 
with the same left-hand symbol and the same beginning of 
their right sides by one rule - e.g. two rules A---~BC, 
A---~BD are replaced by one rule A---~B(C or D). This 
improves effectiveness because of a single (rather than 
double) attempt to expand the same non-terminal symbol 
to the given string of terminals. The method "from longest 
to shortest" says that if a symbol A occurs as a non-last 
right-hand symbol of a rule - e.g. in the rule D--cAE - and 
the grammar includes more rules than one to replace the 
symbol A - e.g. rules: A--~BC, A--~B, then it is more 
effective to make the algorithm check the "longer" rule 
A---~BC before checking the "shorter" rule A---~B. This 
makes it possible to block backtracking in the rule 
D-+A!E. The method "replace symbol by parameter" may 
be used when right-hand sides of productions for different 
symbols tart with the same (sequence of) symbol(s). For 
example, two rules A--~BC, D--~BE may be replaced by 
one rule: F(P)---~ B((C and P is P1) or (D and P is P2)). 
3 Status of the system 
Currently the POLENG dictionary consists of about 2000 
lexemes which corresponds to about 30000 inflected 
forms, mainly from the domain of computer science. The 
research plans for near future include consulting a large 
corpus of computer texts in order to create a bilingual 
dictionary which will enable the translation of a wide 
range of Polish computational texts into English. 
The starting point for the translation algorithm was a 
parser of Polish sentences described in (Szpakowicz, 
1986). Most of the expressions parsed by that system are 
transferable in the system POLENG. There are still a lot 
of grammatical, syntactic and semantic problems to be 
solved. The problem of assigning a correct tense of the 
English output (there are only 3 tenses in Polish) is cur- 
rently solved on the basis of the surface structure of the 
Polish input expression (the solution is far from perfect). 
The problem of determiners is not solved at all (all noun 
groups are assumed efinite). The solutions of these two 
problems will be sought in the near future. 
References 
Szpakowicz S.1986. Formalny opis skladniowy zdan pol- 
skich. Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego. War- 
szawa. 
Courtois B. 1990 : Un syst~me de dictionnaires 61ec- 
troniques pour les mots simples du franqais. In Langue 
franfaise. Larousse. Paris. 
Roche E. 1992. Experiments in dictionary compression. 
Paris. 
Jassem K. 1997. Classification of Polish nouns for the 
electronic flexional dictionary. In Sprache und Datenver: 
arbeitung. International Journal for Language Data 
Processing. To appear. 
95 
