Reuse of a Proper Noun Recognition System 
in Commercial and Operational NLP Applications 
Chinatsu  Aone and John  Ma loney  
SRA In ternat iona l  
4300 Fair Lakes Cour t  
Fair fax,  VA 22033 
aonec@sra .com,  maloney j  ~,~sra.corn 
Abst ract  
SRA's proprietary product, NameTag TM, 
which provides fast and accurate name 
recognition, has been reused in many ap- 
plications in recent and ongoing efforts, in- 
cluding multilingual information retrieval 
and browsing, text clustering, and assis- 
tance to manual text indexing. This paper 
reports on SRA's experience in embedding 
name recognition in these three specific ap- 
plications, and the mutual impacts that oc- 
cur, both on the algorithmic level and in 
the role that name recognition plays in user 
interaction with a system. In the course 
of this, we touch upon various interactions 
between proper name recognition and ma- 
chine translation (MT), as well as the role 
of accurate name recognition in improving 
the performance of word segmentation al- 
gorithms needed for languages whose writ- 
ing systems do not segment words. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Fast and accurate name recognition products are 
only now coming onto the market. SRA's propri- 
etary product, NameTag, has been reused in many 
applications in recent and ongoing efforts, including 
multilingual information retrieval and browsing, text 
clustering, and assistance to manual text indexing. 
In the following paper, we report on our experience 
in embedding name recognition in these, three spe- 
cific applications, as well as the mutual impacts that 
occur, both on the algorithmic level and in the role 
that name recognition plays in user interaction with 
a system. In the course of this, we touch upon var- 
ious interactions between proper name recognition 
and machine translation (MT), as well as the role 
of accurate name recognition in improving the per- 
formance of word segmentation algorithms needed 
for languages uch as Japanese. Name recognition 
clearly offers added value when integrated with other 
algorithms and systems, but the latter also affect 
the way in which name recognition is performed, 
specifically the choice of high-recall or high-precision 
strategies. But first, we discuss the relevant features 
of NameTag. 
2 Descr ip t ion  o f  NameTag 
NameTag is a multilingual name recognition system. 
It finds and disambiguates in texts the names of peo- 
ple, organizations, and places, as well as time and 
numeric expressions with very high accuracy. The 
design of the system makes possible the dynamic 
recognition of names: NameTag does not rely on 
long lists of known names. Instead, NameTag makes 
use of a flexible pattern specification language to 
identify novel names that have not been encountered 
previously. In addition, NameTag can recognize and 
link variants of names in the same document auto- 
matically. For instance, it can link "IBM" to "Inter- 
national Business Machines" and "President Clin- 
ton" to "Bill Clinton." 
NameTag incorporates a language-independent 
C-t-+ pattern-matching engine along with the 
language-specific lexicons, patterns, and other re- 
sources necessary for each language. In addition, 
the Japanese, Chinese, and Thai versions integrate 
word segmenters to deal with the orthographic chal- 
lenges of these languages. (NameTag currently has 
these language versions available plus ones for En- 
glish, Spanish, and French.) 
NameTag is an extremely fast and robust system 
that can be easily integrated with other applications 
through its API. It has been our experience that 
NameTag has lent itself to so many successful inte- 
grations in diverse applications not just due to its ac- 
curacy, but to its speed. (Its NT version is currently 
benchmarked at 300 megabytes/hour on a Pentium 
Pro.) It is an attractive package to embed in an ap- 
plication, as it does not cause significant retardation 
of performance. 
In the following discussion, we refer to various 
versions of NameTag, most prominently systems for 
English and Japanese. Their extraction accuracy 
varies. For example, in the Sixth Message Un- 
derstanding Conference (MUC-6), the English sys- 
tern was benchmarked against he Wall Street Jour- 
nal blind test set for the name tagging task, and 
achieved a 96% F-measure, which is a combination 
ot" recall and precision measures. Our internal test- 
ing of the Japanese system against blind test sets of 
w~rious Japanese newspaper articles indicates that 
it achieves from high-80 to 1ow-90% accuracy, de- 
pending on the types of corpora. Indexing names 
in Japanese texts is usually more challenging than 
English for two main reasons. First, there is no case 
distinction in .Japanese, whereas English names in 
newspapers are capitalized, and capitalization is a 
very strong clue for English name tagging. Sec- 
ond, Japanese words are not separated by spaces and 
therefore must be segmented into separate words be- 
fore the name tagging process. As segmentation is 
not 100% accurate, segmentation errors can some- 
times can use name tagging rules not to fire or to 
misfire. 
3 P roper  Name Recogn i t ion  
In tegrated  Wi th  a Brows ing  & 
Ret r ieva l  Sys tem 
We have recently developed a system incorporating 
NarneTag that allows monolingual users to access 
information on the World Wide Web in languages 
that they do not know (Aone, Charocopos, and Gor- 
linsky, 1997). For example, previously it was not 
easy for a monolingual English speaker to locate nec- 
essary information written in Japanese. The user 
would not know the query terms in Japanese even 
if the search engine accepted Japanese queries. In 
addition, even when the users located a possibly rel- 
evant text in Japanese, they would have little idea 
about what was in the text. Output of off-the-shelf 
machine translation (MT) systems are often of low 
quality, and even "high-end" MT systems have prob- 
lems particularly in translating proper names and 
specialized domain terms, which often contain the 
most critical information to the users. 
Now these users have available our multilingual 
(or cross-linguistic) information browsing and re- 
trieval system, which is aimed at monolingual users 
who are interested in information from multiple lan- 
guage sources. The system takes advantage of name- 
recognition software as embodied in NameTag to im- 
prove the accuracy of cross-linguistic retrieval and 
to provide innovative methods t.o browse and ex- 
plore multil ingual document collections. The sys- 
tem indexes texts in different languages (currently 
English and Japanese) and allows the users to re- 
trieve relevant texts in their native language (cur- 
rently English). The retrieved text is then presented 
to the users with proper names and specialized o- 
main terms translated and hyperlinked. Among the 
innovations in our system is the stress placed upon 
proper names and their role as indices for document 
content. 
The system consists of an Indexing Module, a 
Client Module, and a Term Translation Module. 
The Indexing Module creates and inserts indices into 
a database while the Client, Module allows browsing 
and retrieval of information in the database through 
a Web-browser-based graphical user interface ((~ IJ l). 
The Term Translation Module dynamically trans- 
lates English user queries into Japanese and the in- 
dexed terms in retrieved Japanese documents into 
English. 
The  Index ing  Modu le  
For the present application, the system indexes 
names of people, entities, and locations, as well as 
scientific and technical (S&T) terms in both En- 
glish and Japanese texts, and allows the user to 
query and browse the indexed database in English. 
As NameTag processes texts, the indexed terms are 
stored in a relational database with their semantic 
type information (person, entity, place, S&T term) 
and alias information along with such meta data as 
source, date, language, and frequency information. 
The  Cl ient  Modu le  
The Client Module lets the user both retrieve and 
browse information in the database through the 
Web-browser-based GUI. In the query mode, a form- 
based Boolean query issued by a user is automati-  
cally translated into an SQL query, and the English 
terms in the query are sent to the Term Translation 
Module. The Client Module then retrieves docu- 
ments which match either the original English query 
or the translated .Japanese query. As the indices 
are names and terms which may consist of multiple 
words (e.g., "Warren Christopher," memory chip"), 
the query terms are delimited in separate boxes in 
the form, making sure no ambiguity occurs in both 
translation and retrieval. 
In its browsing mode, the Client Module allows 
the user to browse the information in the database 
in various ways. For example, once the user selects 
a particular document for viewing, the client sends 
it to an appropriate (i.e., English or Japanese) in- 
dexing server for creating hyperlinks for the indexed 
terms, and, in the case of a Japanese document, 
sends the indexed terms to the Term Translation 
Module to translate the Japanese terms into English. 
The result that the user browses is a document each 
of whose indexed terms are hyperlinked to other doc- 
uments containing the same indexed terms. Since 
hyperlinking is based on the original or translated 
English terms, the monolingual English speaker can 
follow the links to both English and .Japanese docu- 
ments transparently. In addition, the Client Module 
is integrated with a commercial MT system for a 
rough translation of the whole text. 
The Term Trans la t ion  Modu le  
The Term Translation Module is used by the Client 
Module bi-directionally in two different modes. 
That is. it translates English query terms into 
Japanese in the query mode and, in reverse, trans- 
lates Japanese indexed terms into English for view- 
ing of a retrieved Japanese text in the browsing 
mode. 
3.1 Issues Concern ing  Proper  Name 
Recogn i t ion  for  Brows ing  and  Ret r ieva l  
Based on the system description above in the pre- 
ceding sections, we describe in more detail in the 
following the impacts of name recognition on multi- 
lingual browsing and retrieval. 
3.1.1 Index ing  Accuracy  
To index, the system uses two different configu- 
rations of NameTag for English and Japanese. In- 
dexing of names is particularly significant in the 
Japanese case, where the accuracy of indexing de- 
pends on the accuracy of segmentation of a sen- 
tence. In English, since words are separated by 
spaces, there is no issue of indexing accuracy for 
individual words. However, in languages uch as 
Japanese, where word boundaries are not explicitly 
marked by spaces, word segmentation is necessary 
to index terms. However, most segmentation algo- 
rithms are more likely to make errors on names, as 
these are less likely to be in the lexicons. Thus, use 
of name indexing can improve overall segmentation 
and indexing accuracy. 
3.1.2 Query  D isambiguat ion  
As described above, the Indexing Module not only 
identifies names of people, entities and locations, but 
also disambiguates types among themselves and be- 
tween names and non-names. Thus, if the user is 
searching for documents with the location "Wash- 
ington" (not a person or company named "Wash- 
ington") or a person "Clinton" (not a location), the 
system allows the user to specify, through the GUI, 
the type of each query term. This ability to dis- 
ambiguate types of queries not only constrains the 
search and hence improves retrieval precision, but 
also speeds up the search time considerably, espe- 
cially when the size of the database is very large. 
3.1.3 T rans la t ion  D isambiguat ion  
In developing this system, we have intention- 
ally avoided an approach where we first translate 
foreign-language documents into English and index 
the translated English texts (Fluhr, 1995; Kay, 1995; 
Oard and Doff, 1996). In (Aone et al, 1994), we 
have shown that, in an application of extracting in- 
formation from foreign language texts and present- 
ing the results in English, the "MT first, Information 
Extraction second" approach was less accurate than 
the approach in the reverse order, i.e., "Information 
Extraction first. MT second." In particular, transla- 
tion quality of names by even the best NIT systems 
was poor. In an indexing and retrieval application 
such as the one under discussion, the proper identi- 
fication and translation of names are critical. 
There are two cases where an MT system fails to 
translate names. First, it fails to recognize where 
a name starts and ends in a text string. This is a 
non-trivial problem in languages uch as Japanese 
where words are not segmented by spaces and there 
is no capitalization convention. Often, an MT sys- 
tem "chops up" names into words and translates 
each word individually. For example, among the 
errors we have encountered, an MT system failed 
to recognize a person name "Mori Hanae" in kanji 
characters, segmented it into three words "mori," 
"hana," and "e" and translated them into "forest," 
"England," and "blessing," respectively. 
Another common MT system error is where the 
system fails to make a distinction between names 
and non-names. This distinction is very important 
in getting correct translations as names are usu- 
ally translated very differently from non-names. For 
example, a person named "Dole" in katakana was 
translated into a common noun "doll." Abbreviated 
country names for Japan and the United States in 
single kanji characters, which often occurs in news- 
papers, were sometimes translated by an MT system 
into their literal kanji meanings, "day" and "rice," 
respectively. 
The proper name recognition capability pro- 
vided by NameTag solves both of these problems. 
NameTag's ability to identify names prevents chop- 
ping names into pieces. NarneTag's ability to assign 
semantic types to names makes possible greater pre- 
cision in translating names. 
4 P roper  Name Recogn i t ion  
In tegrated  w i th  Text  C lus ter ing  
Multimedia Fusion (MMF) is a system SRA devel- 
oped to provide a tool to help people deal with large 
incoming streams of multimedia data (Aone, Ben- 
nett, and Gorlinsky, 1996). MMF clusters texts 
automatically into a hierarchical concept ree, and, 
unlike a typical message routing system, the users 
do not need to specify beforehand what topics that 
the incoming texts cluster into. It employs Cobweb- 
based conceptual clustering (Fisher, 1987), with the 
feature vectors required for that algorithm supplied 
by keywords picked from the body of a text based 
upon their worth as determined by the Inverse Doc- 
ument Frequency (IDF) metric (Church and Gale, 
1995). In addition, NameTag is run over the incom- 
ing texts (CNN closed-captions and ClariNet news 
feeds) to identify the proper names in the document 
(persons. companies, locations). 
One of the novel features in this system was 
the important role of proper name recognition. It 
is important to recognize that using white-space- 
delimited tokens in a text as keywords provides ig- 
nificantly less information than is actually available. 
The proper name information (for persons, organiza- 
tions, and locations) adds considerable information 
to what otherwise would be a meaningless string of 
tokens. 
4.1 I ssues  Concern ing  Proper  Name 
Recogn i t ion  for  Text  C lus ter ing  
4.1.1 P roper  Names  as Keywords  for  
C lus ters  of  Texts  
Proper names are natural keywords to char- 
acterize the contents of text clusters. Without 
proper name recognition, "International Business 
Machines" is just a string containing three com- 
mon nouns that may or may not be informative key- 
words. Recognizing it as a proper name enlarges the 
set of possible keywords for the document. Second, 
proper name recognition allows the disambiguation 
of names from non-names, such as "white" in "white 
shirt" vs. "Bob White," which enhances the accu- 
racy of keyword selection. 
The alias forms generated by NameTag are also of 
great value to IDF calculations, since we can select 
one of the name forms of a particular entity occur- 
ring within a document ("President Clinton," "Bill 
Clinton," "Clinton") to be the canonical form for 
all the name forms. This reduces the chances that 
alternate forms of the same name will be used as 
distinct keywords for the same document. 
As discussed in (Aone, Bennett, and Gorlinsky, 
1996), we quantitatively evaluated the accuracy of 
clustering, and the use of proper name recognition 
enhanced the F-measure (a combined measure of re- 
call and precision) from 50% to 61% in clustering in 
ClariNet news feed. 
4.1.2 Ta i lo r ing  of  NameTag to C lus ter ing  
The name recognition technology embodied in 
NameTag had to be customized for MMF, particu- 
larly for the closed-caption texts from CNN Headline 
News. It had to handle all upper-case closed caption 
texts, which pose some challenges due to the absence 
of case information. In general, lexical information 
has to be available for name recognition, in upper- 
case text, which tends to have a retarding effect on 
system performance. In addition, since the closed 
captions are transcriptions of speech by anchor per- 
sons or reporters, characteristics of spoken language 
had to be accommodated (e.g., "OK" is Oklahoma 
in a text while it is an answer in a caption). 
4.1.3 H igh  Prec i s ion  vs. H igh  Reca l l  Name 
Recogn i t ion  
The proper name recognition used in MMF has to 
be highly accurate. In name recognition, as in other 
areas of language technology, there is a trade-off be- 
tween recall and precision. In applications uch as 
text clustering, high precision is preferred over high 
recall so that the system does not introduce rrors in 
keyword selection. That is, not recognizing "'BILL 
CLINTON" is more acceptable than mis-recognizing 
"BILL FOLDER" as a person name. 
To handle this, NameTag provides three settings, 
depending on what kind of application it is being 
used for: "High Precision," "High Accuracy," and 
"Normal." The first, setting ensures that. all names 
identified are correct, even at the expense of some 
possibly missed ones. The second setting focuses on 
identifying all possible names within a document., 
even at the cost of some false positives. The third 
setting is a balanced one, aiming at achieving the 
highest possible combined scores. For MMF, we 
used the "High Precision" setting to optimize the 
Cobweb clustering performance. 
5 P roper  Name Recogn i t ion  
In tegrated  w i th  Manua l  Text  
Index ing  
SRA recently developed an an operational indexing 
system, the Human Indexing Assistant (HIA), which 
assists the human indexing of an incoming flow of 
documents. The task involves human indexers who 
process a large incoming stream of documents and 
fill out a template with names of products and equip- 
ment, as well as companies and individuals involved 
in the manufacture of those items. Integral to it is 
the use of NameTag. 
HIA's GUI presents the user with three screens, 
the first containing the original document o be in- 
dexed, the second the template to be filled out, and 
the third used for iconic representations of the in- 
dexed material. This third screen serves as a work- 
ing area where the user, having filled out a template 
for a name to be indexed, can iconify it, place it in 
the third screen and make links between it and other 
iconified objects such as company names. As part 
of the indexing process, NameTag is first launched 
from the indexing interface, and it highlights in the 
first screen the proper names in the document o 
be indexed. The indexer can then select what they 
think is appropriate to index and paste the names 
into templates in the second screen. 
5.1 Issues Concern ing  Proper  Name 
Recogn i t ion  for Manua l  Text  Index ing  
For this application, we used the "high recall" set- 
ting of NameTag, as discussed in Section 4.1.3. It 
was important hat as many potential names as pos- 
sible be identified. It is a part of the indexers' 
job that no names be missed during indexing. In- 
serting NameTag into the process required that it 
gain the indexers' confidence that it could indeed 
hit all possible names. The indexers were not par- 
ticularly concerned with misidentification of names, 
as these could be quickly passed over by the human 
4 
(e.g., "BILL FOLDER" as a personal name in all 
upper-case text). Once the users had confidence in 
NameTag, it was possible for them to stop reading 
documents in toto, thus producing reat increases in 
the throughput of the operation. 
As a side issue in this sort of application, it should 
be pointed out that information on quality of the 
indexing when done without automated or semi- 
automated help is rarely available or reliable. The 
users impose requirements that they themselves may 
not meet consistently ("whatever you do, your sys- 
tem can't miss any names"), and the developers 
must work within what may be a more or less fic- 
tional framework. However, dealing with issues of 
this kind is critical to success. Successful insertion 
of HIA into the workplace involved getting the in- 
dexers to buy into its value for them. Ultimately, the 
deciding factor was the clearly faster ate of indexing 
with the system than with the line-editing-oriented, 
totally manual system being replaced. 
6 Conc lus ion  
We have discussed three diverse applications in 
which proper name recognition as embodied in 
NameTag has played an important role. Clearly, the 
identification ofnames can improve the performance 
of other algorithms and systems. In return, the na- 
ture of the application in which name recognition 
is being used affects whether the name recognition 
should aim at high coverage or high accuracy. 
Fisher, Douglas H. 1987. Knowledge acquisition 
via incremental conceptual clustering. Machine 
Learning, 2. 
Fluhr, Christian. 1995. Multilingual informat, ion re- 
trieval. In Ronald A. Cole, Joseph Mariani, Hans 
Uszkoreit, Annie Zaenen, and Victor Zue, editors, 
Survey of the State of the Art in H'uman Language 
Technology. Oregon Graduate Institute. 
Kay, Martin. 1995. Machine translation: The dis- 
appointing past and present. In Ronald A. Cole, 
Joseph Mariani, Hans Uszkoreit, Annie Zaenen, 
and Victor Zue, editors, Survey of the State of 
the Art in Human Language Technology. Oregon 
Graduate Institute. 
Oard, Douglas W. and Bonnie J. Dorr, editors. 1996. 
A Survey of Multilingual Tezt Retrieval. Techni- 
cal Report UMIACS-TR-96~19. Institute for Ad- 
vanced Computer Studies, University of Mary- 
land. 
Re ferences  
Aone, Chinatsu, Scott William Bennett, and James 
Gorlinsky. 1996. Multi-media Fusion through 
Application of Machine Learning and NLP. In 
AAAI Spring Symposium Working Notes on Ma- 
chine Learning in Information Access. 
Aone, Chinatsu, Hatte Blejer, Mary Ellen 
Okurowski, and Carol Van Ess-Dykema. 1994. A 
Hybrid Approach to Multilingual Text Processing: 
Information Extraction and Machine Translation. 
In Proceedings of the First Conference of the As- 
sociation for Machine Translation in the Americas 
(AMTA). 
Aone, Chinatsu, Nicholas Charocopos, and James 
Gorlinsky. 1997. An Intelligent Multilingual In- 
formation Browsing and Retrieval System Using 
Information Extraction. In Proceedings of the 
Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing. 
Church, Kenneth and William Gale. 1995. Inverse 
document frequency (idf): A measure of devi- 
ations from poisson. In Proceedings of the 3rd 
Workshop on Very Large Corpora. 

