L 
Automat ic  Message Indexing and Full Text Retr ieval  for a 
Communicat ion Aid 
Stefan Langer 
Applied Computing 
University of Dundee 
Dundee, Scotland 
slanger@mic, dundee, ac. uk 
Marianne Hickey 
Applied Computing 
University of Dundee 
Dundee, Scotland 
mhickey@mic, dundee, ac. uk 
Abstract 
The aim of the WordKeys project is to 
enhance a communication aid with tech- 
niques based on research in text retrieval, 
in order to reduce the cognitive load nor- 
mally associated with retrieving pre-stored 
messages in augmentative and alternative 
communication (AAC) systems. In this 
paper, the differences between traditional 
information retrieval and the requirements 
for text retrieval in a communication aid 
are highlighted. We then present he over- 
all design of the retrieval based communi- 
cation aid, and describe the morphological 
analysis module used for indexing and the 
ranking algorithm in more detail. The sys- 
tem relies on a large lexicon for the auto- 
matic indexing of messages and for seman- 
tic query expansion. The lexicon is derived 
from the WordNet database and addition- 
ally includes frequency information. Cur- 
rently, user trials are being carried out to 
determine the suitability of the approach 
for AAC. 
1 Message  re t r ieva l  fo r  an  AAC 
sys tem 
Currently, there exist different ypes of communica- 
tion aids for non-speaking people. Among the sys- 
tems using natural anguage, we distinguish two dif- 
ferent approaches. The communication strategy can 
be based on enhanced message composition, or the 
user can rely on a set of pre-stored messages, to- 
gether with a selection procedure. It is the latter 
type of communication aid that will be discussed 
further here. 
A principal deficiency of the current generation of 
communication aids is the low rate of communica- 
tion which can be achieved by users. Rates of be- 
tween 2 and 25 words per minute are typical, which 
compares poorly to natural speech rates of 150 to 175 
words per minute (Foulds, 1980); (Darragh and Wit- 
ten, 1992). The low communication rate does not en- 
courage ither the user of an aid to create messages 
or a communication partner to maintain attention 
(Aim et al 1993). For message selection systems, 
the low communication rate is partially caused by 
the fact that many systems rely on retrieval meth- 
ods that put a high cognitive load on the user. In 
most systems, the user must remember an access 
route, or in some cases a code, in order to speak a 
message. The load placed on the user means that he 
or she is only able to select from a small number of 
different hings to say. 
The reduction of the necessary user input to pro- 
duce an utterance and the minimization of the cogni- 
tive the load on the user in a message-based commu- 
nication aid can be achieved through efficient mes- 
sage access. A novel approach to reach this is the use 
of full text retrieval to access a message database. 
Contrary to most existing message based system, in 
an AAC system based on text retrieval, in order to 
select a message, the users do not have to remember 
any message numbers or another code. They can 
select a conversational item from the database by 
entering one or several key words. Appropriate mes- 
sages will be those containing these words or words 
related to the key words (Hickey and Page, 1993); 
(Hickey, 1995). 
At a first glance, the implementation f a text re- 
trieval system for AAC users might seem straightfor- 
ward, as retrieval techniques have been investigated 
for decades. However, most algorithms uggested in 
the literature are designed for collections of larger 
documents, containing several hundreds of words. 
Little research as been dedicated to the investiga- 
tion of full text retrieval of short messages such as 
those used in communication aids. Thus techniques 
from information retrieval have to be modified con- 
siderably to be applicable to the messages commu- 
nicated by AAC users, which typically contain not 
more than 20 words. In addition to the difference in 
length of the messages to be accessed, there is an- 
other constraint that affects communication aids to a 
much higher degree than standard text retrieval sys- 
tems - -  the minimal input requirement. In standard 
text retrieval, queries of 5-10 words are regarded as 
short queries (Hearst, 1996)..This is different for a 
communication aid. Users of these devices typically 
have a very low typing rate, and it is desirable that 
any message from the message database can be re- 
trieved by only one key word, without he need for 
query refinement. 
The state of the art and the named special re- 
quirement for a retrieval module in an AAC device 
suggest he use of enhanced full text retrieval us- 
ing semantic expansion of queries. A system based 
on a query expansion technique has the capability 
of finding messages that contain words that are se- 
mantically related to the query words in addition 
to the messages that contain the query words them- 
selves. Semantic query expansion isespecially suited 
for communication aids, where minimal input and 
high recall are the key factors. Research in text re- 
trieval has shown that it looks promising to further 
investigate the use of electronic semantic lexicons 
both for query expansion and in order to overcome 
problems of word sense ambiguity (Richardson and 
Smeaton, 1995). Especially relating to short text, 
research on image caption retrieval has shown that 
the recall rate can be considerably higher, if suitable 
methods of calculating semantic distances between 
query words and message words are used (Smeaton 
and Quigley, 1996); (Guglielmo and Rowe, 1996). 
The measurement of semantic distance can be based 
on semantic relationship between words. The rela- 
tionship encoded in many dictionaries and thesauri 
is synonymy, and often some hypernyms are also 
included. Both kind of links are relevant for mes- 
sage retrieval. It has been shown that apart from 
? synonyms, which have been used for query expan- 
sions for decades, hyponymic links should be con- 
sidered for text retrieval purposes (Richardson and 
Smeaton, 1995). The usefulness of hyponymic links 
has also been evaluated for WordKeys (Langer and 
Hickey, in preparation). The usefulness of other 
links, such as meronymy, has yet to be confirmed. 
For semantic query expansion through semanti- 
cally related words, a comprehensive electronic dic- 
tionary containing extensive semantic information 
is needed. Research in electronic lexicography has 
been very intense during the last years, and many 
large dictionaries are being built for different lan- 
guages. Few of those dictionaries, however, are pub- 
licly available; and few of those available are suit- 
able for retrieval of unrestricted text. The semantic 
database WordNet (Miller et al 1990) has already 
been successfully used for information retrieval pur- 
poses (Richardson and Smeaton, 1995); (Smeaton 
and Quigley, 1996), and has also been a source for 
the design of another lexical database for AAC sys- 
tems, which, like the lexicon used for WordKeys, in- 
cluded additional frequency information (Zickus et 
al, 1995). The size and coverage of WordNet led to 
the decision to base the indexing module and the 
semantic expansion i  the WordKeys ystem on this 
lexical database. 
2 The  WordKeys  sys tem 
WordKeys is a system based on full text retrieval 
of pre-stored messages. It is typically used in two 
different settings: 
? When the user wants to prepare a communica- 
tion, new messages are typed in. These mes- 
sages are automatically indexed and integrated 
in the system's database. 
? In communication mode, WordKeys displays 
the search field, where the user can type in 
search words, the list of predicted input words, 
the list of messages found and the field contain- 
ing the selected message. 
Figure 1 demonstrates the overall architecture of
the WordKeys ystem. 
WordKeys is implemented in C++. There is 
strong emphasis of re-usability of the software, espe- 
cially the lexicon modules, for other AAC-systems. 
We have also taken care to provide the possibility of 
porting the system to languages other than English. 
The different lexicons are text files and correspond 
to a simple and clearly specified format. They can 
be exchanged for lexicons in other languages. 
3 Index ing ,  morpho log ica l  ana lys i s  
and message  rank ing  
3.1 Indexing 
The WordKeys system offers the possibility of im- 
porting any text file to add it to the message 
database. Additionally, at any stage of a conver- 
sation, the user can add a message to the database 
or modify an existing message. When a message is
added to the database, the following actions are per- 
formed: 
? Tokenization; 
10 
supervisor 
preferences 
input of neyj~ ~" messag e~,~ inputqUe ry 
. \[ morpho- 
message I ;,.,4or \] ~ mmn ~ I logical 
database ~ ~-  lexicon - J  module 
inputofnew~ ~ Z  ~ % messages indexing 
\[ message text file \[ \[ stoplist \[ \[ suffixes \[ :eX;tions\[ 
Figure 1: Overall organisation of the WordKeys system 
? Morphological analysis: word forms are anal- 
ysed to find lemmas and roots and to determine 
their syntactic ategory; 
? The resulting words are looked up in the seman- 
tic lexicon to find frequent hypernyms which are 
added to the list of index words; 
? The message with the list of index words is 
added to the database and its index. 
3.2 Morphological analysis 
Morphological analysers are available in the public 
domain. However, we decided to use a custom pro- 
grammed morphological module, because the output 
of the available analysers did not correspond to our 
needs, and, at least for English, a simple analysis 
is relatively easy to implement. The data used for 
analysis is partially based on the WordNet morpho- 
logical information. The morphological module uses 
an affix list in combination with an exception list 
and the information about syntactic ategories from 
WordNet. The analysis of a word form is carried out 
in two steps: 
? lemmatization; 
? determination f the derivational root (only for 
semantically transparent derivation affixes). 
Lemmatization is lexicon-based. After the affix 
removal, the unaffxed form is looked up in the lex- 
icon, considering the possible syntactic ategory re- 
turned by the affix removal process. Only if the 
form is found there, it is accepted as a lemma and 
added to the message index. Word forms leading 
11 
to several possible lemmas are currently not disam- 
biguated. Apart from the lack of disambiguation, we 
achieved an error-free lemmatisation of all occurring 
word forms for a trial message database of about 
1200 words. 
After the lemmatization procedure, a derivational 
analysis is carried out on the lemmatized word 
forms. We separate the two steps in order to be able 
to give the link between a word form and the lemma 
a higher weight in message access than links between 
morphologically complex words and their roots. The 
procedure of distinguishing between the results of in- 
flectional and derivational nalysis is consistent with 
the findings reported in Hull (1996). He concludes 
that complex stemming algorithms can be slightly 
more effective than simple ones, and that the re- 
moval of derivational affixes is not always desirable. 
This is especially true for a system such as Word- 
Keys, which uses semantic relationship for retrieval 
and performs message ranking, which can increase 
the impact of inaccuracies in the morphological nal- 
ysis. Semantic relations between a lemma and some 
word form on the one hand differs considerably from 
the semantic relations between derived words and 
their root. 
To be able to determine semantically related 
words without loss of precision, information from the 
morphological nalysis is also used to determine the 
morpho-syntactic categories of word forms and lem- 
mas. The category can be clearly determined in the 
following cases: 
? a word has one single entry in the main lexicon, 
which means the word is already a lemma; 
? a word form has an inflectional or derivational 
affix which only occurs with bases of one single 
morpho-syntactic category. 
Removing ambiguities concerning syntactic ate- 
gories has a certain impact on the performance of 
the semantic expansion module. The less words 
? with inappropriate syntactic ategories are included 
in the index, the higher precision will be achieved 
by the system, because less expansions will be gen- 
erated. For many word forms in the messages, how- 
ever, the category remains ambiguous. Currently, 
we are investigating the use stochastic taggers and 
local grammars for determining syntactic informa- 
tion in these cases. 
3.3 Message ranking 
When the user has typed in one or several key words 
and decides to start the search the following tasks 
are carried out: 
? Tokenization: the content of the input field on 
the interface is parsed into word forms. 
? Lemmatization: word forms are analysed to be 
able to look them up in the lexicon. 
? The word forms and lemmas are looked up in 
the message index. If they are found, the cor- 
responding message numbers are added to the 
list of retrieved messages. 
? The lemmas are looked up in the semantic lex- 
icon to retrieve related words. The relations 
used for query expansion are dependent on the 
semantic paths defined in the settings. The re- 
lated words are re-applied for another query to 
the index of the message database. 
The messages which have been found are displayed 
on the screen, the order corresponds to their score. 
Trials with a number of different settings for the 
message retrieval algorithm have been carried out to 
improve message ranking. The ranking algorithm as- 
sures that messages which are retrieved, but are not 
considered very relevant for a query, are put lower 
in the list or excluded from the display. Conforming 
to the results of the trials, messages retrieved from 
the database are ranked according to the criterion 
of semantic distance between key word and index 
word. Semantic distance is zero in the beginning of 
the following list and increases: 
? same word form; 
? different word form from the key word form 
(cars - -  car); 
? other derivation of the root of the key word (in- 
ves t igat ion -  investigate); 
? synonyms of key word (car - -  automobile); 
? other related words: the semantic paths and 
their weighting are defined in the settings file. 
A path is the concatenation of semantic links 
that are used to get from the input key word to 
the index word. 
Table 1 gives the figures for the message ranking 
criteria applied in the case of one single key word. 
For several key words, a combination of the semantic 
distances for different key words is used for ranking. 
When several key words are typed in, the message 
retrieval algorithms is working with an OR- link be- 
tween search words. However, any message being 
retrieved by more than one of the key words will 
be given an increased score; the more key words a 
message is related to, the better its score. 
12 
Description Weight decrease Comment 
Word in message is same word form as 0 exact match, best rating 
input word 
Word in message is lemmatized in index 1 lemmatization leads to less semantic 
and matches input word distance than derivational nalysis 
Word in message is reduced to root in 2 derivational nalysis 
index to match input word 
Semantically related word is looked up > 5 depends on semantic relation 
in lexicon 
Table 1: Value determination for message ranking 
We will illustrate the message ranking with an ex- 
ample. The messages retrieved from an experimen- 
tal database for the item swim are (in that order): 
(1) Would you like to go \]or a swim? 
(2) Normally I don't like swimming, but this Sunday 
it was so hot that I spent the whole day on the 
beach and in the water. 
(3) I 'm not a very good swimmer. 
(4) Shall we go for a dip ? 
The first message contains the key word itself; 
message (2) contains another word form of the same 
lemma. The third message in the list contains a 
derivation of the key word. Finally, message (4) 
is an example of retrieval through semantic query 
expansion. It contains a synonym (dip) of the key 
word. 
3.4 The lexicon for query expansion 
One purpose of the main lexicon in WordKeys is to 
serve as a lexical database for the indexing module 
when performing morphological nalysis. The main 
function of this lexicon, however, is to serve as a 
basis for the semantic query expansion. To choose 
the right lexicon, we had to bear in mind that Word- 
Keys is a retrieval system for unrestricted text. This 
implies that the system is able to retrieve messages 
containing any word of the English language apart 
from extremely domain specific vocabulary. 
We decided to use the semantic database WordNet 
for the following reasons: 
? it is very comprehensive; 
? it contains most relevant semantic links; 
? the information contained in WordNet is stored 
in text files, and can be easily converted to any 
other format. 
In order to use the information in WordNet for 
our text retrieval algorithm, some preparation was 
needed. 
? WordNet was converted to a format suitable 
for the WordKeys oftware. We chose a format 
which was easily portable: a text file containing 
lemmas together with their syntactic ategory 
and related words corresponding to the differ- 
ent senses; 
? The semantic paths that the WordKeys soft- 
ware uses for query expansion were defined. A 
semantic path is a series of semantic relations 
which can be used to reach a lemmatised mes- 
sage word from a lemmatised input key word. 
This also involved efining weights for the links 
in order to rank retrieved messages. For exam- 
ple, messages containing synonyms of key words 
receive a high rating, those containing hyper- 
nyms are assigned a lower rating. 
Additionally we included statistics over word fre- 
quencies in the main lexicon, in order to be able to 
retrieve hypernyms ofwords that are useful as index 
words - these are not necessarily the closest superor- 
dinated words in the WordNet hierarchy, but ofte.n 
words occurring several levels higher. 
Consequently, in each lexicon entry the following 
information is stored: 
Syntactic ategory of word, which is used for 
morphological nalysis and semantic links. 
Frequency (0 if the word is not included in the 
frequency list). The frequency stored is re- 
trieved from a large database of mainly writ- 
ten text, the British National Corpus (BNC). 
The list contains the most frequent 8000 words 
in this corpus; evaluation of a comparison be- 
tween a frequency counting lexicon and a lex- 
icon without word frequencies are summarized 
in the next section. 
13 
Links to other words in the lexicon, and speci- 
fication of the type of link (synonym, hyponym 
etc.). 
4 Evaluation 
Formal evaluation of the performance of the se- 
mantic retrieval modules is reported in Langer and 
Hickey (in preparation). The purpose of the evalu- 
ation was to look at the benefits of semantic expan- 
sion in terms of retrieval success. These trials have 
shown, that the semantic expansion enhances re- 
call rate considerably without having a major effect 
on precision. A further improvement was achieved 
by including frequency information in the lexicon. 
The evaluation results for the frequency counting 
lexicon were considerably better than those for the 
first lexicon derived from WordNet without includ- 
ing frequencies. The frequency counts can be used 
to determine frequent hyponyms and hyperonyms 
of index terms, even if they are rather distant in 
the hyponymic hierarchy, because the method al- 
lows the elimination of intermediate level terms that 
are not interesting for query expansion. Taking into 
account his information resulted in a higher recall 
rate, without a major detoriation i  precision. For 
a small, experimental database, 80% of the target 
messages were correctly retrieved (compared with 
about 70% with the first lexicon and 50% without 
query expansion). 
Currently we have started the second evaluation 
phase. A non-speaking person who has already 
had experience with message based systems for sev- 
eral years, and who uses a relatively large pool of 
pre-stored messages, i  evaluating WordKeys in real 
communication settings. The main purpose of this 
study is to investigate he following points: 
? How high is the recall rate in real communica- 
tion settings? 
? How useful is the semantic expansion module, 
i.e. how often does it play a crucial role for 
successful retrieval? 
Apart from these more technical points, the inter- 
face and ease of use will also be a evaluated. 
5 Conclusions 
We have detailed the reasons which lead to the de- 
sign of a communication aid for non-speakers based 
on ideas from text retrieval with semantic expan- 
sion, and we demonstrated the overall design of the 
prototype. The main differences between standard 
information retrieval and text retrieval for an AAC 
system were presented, namely the size and type of 
texts retrieved by the system and the necessity to 
minimize the cognitive load, which leads to the min- 
imal input requirement. In the detailed system de- 
scription, we have shown that a precise morpholog- 
ical analysis can be achieved - -  at least for English 
- -  with relatively low effort, ff we use data from pub- 
licly available resources. The morphological module 
is indispensable to be able to enhance the system 
with a query expansion algorithm, which is needed 
to satisfy the minimal input requirement for com- 
munication aids. 
Several ideas for improving the text retrieval al- 
gorithms and WordKeys and their inclusion in other 
communication aids are still waiting to be realised. 
One idea is to use a semantic lexicon that is able to 
learn from the input. This would mean that success- 
ful semantic links will get a higher weight han other 
ones. New links could be added based on knowledge 
of the user's message selections. Interactions where 
initial search words do not retrieve relevant messages 
could be recorded. 
A further aim is the integration of the retrieval 
module with other AAC systems. WordKeys is not 
designed to assist all kinds of communication. In- 
tegration with other AAC software should be inves- 
tigated, such as software designed for unique text 
entry (word prediction systems) and for the rapid 
use of quick conversational fil ers. 
Acknowledgements 
The current phase of the WordKeys project is funded 
through a European HCM/TMR fellowship for 20 
months (January 1996 - September 1997). Evalua- 
tion equipment has been purchased with a donation 
from the Anonymous Charitable Trust. 
References 
Aim N., Murray I.R., Arnott J. and Newell A.F. 
1993. Pragmatics and affect in a communication 
system for non-speakers. Journal of the Ameri- 
can Voice I /0  Society. Special Issue: People with 
disabilities, March 1993, pp. 1-15. 
Darragh J. and Witten I. 1992. The Reactive Key- 
board. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press. 
Foulds R. 1980. Communication rates for non- 
speech expression as a function of manual tasks 
and linguistic constraints. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Rehabilitation Engi- 
neering, Toronto, RESNA, pp. 83-87. 
Guglielmo E.J. and Rowe N.C. 1996. Natural- 
language retrieval of images based on descriptive 
14 
captions. A CM Transactions on Information Sys- 
tems, 14, 3 (July 1996), pp. 237-267. 
Hearst M. 1996. Improving Full-Text Preci- 
sion on Short Queries using Simple Constraints. 
In Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Symposium 
on Document Analysis and Information Retrieval 
(SDAIR), Las Vegas, April 1996. 
Hickey M. 1995. Communication enhancement in
an aid for severely disabled people. PhD Thesis. 
Coventry University. 
Hickey M. and Page C. J. 1993. Polyvox: Flexible 
message selection in a communication prosthesis 
for non-speakers. In Proceedings of the 2nd Euro- 
pean Conference on the Advancement ofRehabili- 
tation Technology, May 26 - 28, 1993, Stockholm, 
Sweden, Section 11.3, pp. 89 - 91. 
Hull D. 1996. Stemming Algorithms: A Case Study 
for Detailed Evaluation. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science, vol 47, Number 
1 (January), pp 70-84: 
Langer S. and Hickey M. in preparation. Using Se- 
mantic Lexicons for Intelligent Message Retrieval 
in a Communication Aid. Submitted to Journal 
of Natural Language Engineering, special issue on 
Natural Language Processing for Communication 
Aids. 
Miller G. A. et al 1990. Wordnet: An on-line lexical 
database. International Journal of Lexicography, 
3(4). 
Richardson R. and Smeaton A. 1995. Using Word- 
Net in a Knowledge-Based Approach to Informa- 
tion Retrieval. Working paper CA-0395, School of 
Computer Applications, Trinity College Dublin. 
Smeaton A. and Quigley I. 1996. Experiments on 
Using Semantic Distances between Words in Im- 
age Caption Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 19th 
International Conference on Research and Devel- 
opment in Information Retrieval, Zfirich, pp. 174- 
180. 
Zickus, W. M., K. F. McCoy, P. W. Demasco and 
Pennington C.A. 1995. A lexical database for 
intelligent AAC systems. In Proceedings of the 
RESNA '95 Annual Conference, pages 124-126, 
Arlington, VA. RESNA Press. 
15 
16 
