Experience in WordNet Sense Tagging in the Wall Street Journal 
Janyce Wiebet, Julie Maplest, Lei Duant, and Rebecca Bruce~t 
tDept, of Computer Science and the Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, NM 88003 
:~Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering 
Southern Methodist University 
Dallas, TX  75275-0112 
wiebe, jmaples, lduan@cr l  .nmsu. edu, rbruce@seas,  smu. edu 
Abstract 
This paper eports on our experience hand 
tagging the senses of 25 of the most fre- 
quent verbs in 12,925 sentences ofthe Wall 
Street Journal Treebank corpus (Marcus et 
al. 1993). The verbs are tagged with re- 
spect to senses in WordNet (Miller 1990). 
Some of the annotated verbs can function 
as both main and auxiliary verbs, and some 
are often used in idioms. This paper sug- 
gests consistently representing these as sep- 
arate subclasses. Strategies described in 
the coding instruction for recognizing id- 
ioms are described, as well as some chal- 
lenging ambiguities found in the data. 
1 Introduct ion 
This paper reports on our experience hand tagging 
the senses of 25 of the most frequent verbs in 12,925 
sentences of the Wall Street Journal Treebank cor- 
pus (Marcus et al 1993). The purpose of this work 
is to support related work in automatic word-sense 
disambiguation. 
The verbs are tagged with respect o senses in 
WordNet (Miller 1990), which has become widely 
used, for example in corpus-annotation projects 
(Miller et al 1994, Ng & Hian 1996, and Grish- 
man et al 1994) and for performing disambiguation 
(Resnik 1995 and Leacock et ai. 1993). 
The verbs to tag were chosen on the basis of how 
frequently they occur in the text, how wide their 
range of senses, and how distinguishable the senses 
are from one another. 
In related work, we have begun to tag nouns and 
adjectives as well. These are being chosen addition- 
ally on the basis of co-occurrence with the verbs al- 
ready tagged, to support approaches such as (Hirst 
1987), in which word-sense ambiguities are resolved 
with respect to one another. 
Some of the chosen verbs can function as both 
main and auxiliary verbs, and some are often used 
in idioms. In this paper, we suggest consistently 
representing these as separate subclasses. 
We apply a preprocessor to the data, which auto- 
matically identifies some classes of verb occurrence 
with good accuracy. This facilitates manual annota- 
tion, because it is easier to fix a moderate number of 
errors than to tag the verbs completely from scratch. 
The preprocessor performs other miscellaneous tasks 
to aide in the tagging task, such as separating out 
punctuation marks and contractions. 
At the end of the paper, we share some strategies 
from our coding instructions for recognizing idioms, 
and show some challenging ambiguities we found in 
the data. 
2 The Verbs and the Basic Tag 
Format 
The following are the verbs that were tagged. The 
total number of occurrences is 6,197. 
VERB NUMBER VERB NUMBER 
have 2740 make 473 
take 316 get 231 
add 118 pay 189 
see 159 call 151 
decline 84 hold 127 
come 191 give 168 
keep I01 know 87 
find 130 lose 82 
believe 103 raise 124 
drop 61 lead 105 
work 101 leave 81 
run 105 look 95 
meet 75 
The basic tags have the following form. Exten- 
sions will be given below. 
word_<lemma, WordNet POS, WordNet sense number> 
8 
For example: 
The Sacramento-based S&L  had_(have 
verb 4) assets of $2.4 billion at the end of 
September. 
That is, 'had' is a form of the main verb 'have' oc- 
curring as WordNet sense number 4. 
3 Ref inements  
We consistently break out certain uses of verbs to a 
greater extent than WordNet does, in particular, id- 
ioms and verbs of intermediate (and auxiliary) func- 
tion. There are several reasons for doing so. 
The primary reason is to perform more accurate 
tagging. Not all such uses are covered by WordNet 
entries. 
A second reason is to support identifying bet- 
ter features for automatic tagging. Some of these 
special-case uses can be identified with good accu- 
racy with simple grammars, while the more semanti- 
cally weighty uses of the same verb generally cannot 
be. Thus, different features will be appropriate for 
the special-case versus other uses. By tagging them 
as separate categories, one can search for separate 
features characterizing each class. 
Finally, it is helpful to the human tagger for the 
preprocessor to target these distinguished classes, for 
which relatively high-accuracy automatic solutions 
are possible. 
3.1 Auxil iary Verbs 
WordNet does not provide sense information for aux- 
iliary uses of verbs. SEMCOR (Miller et al 1994) 
leaves these uses untagged. Among the verbs tagged 
in our corpus, only 'have' has an auxiliary use, which 
we tag as follows, with the string "aux" replacing the 
sense number: 
South Korea has_(have verb_aux) recorded 
a trade surplus of 71 million dollars so far 
this year. 
As they can be recognized automatically with high 
accuracy, auxiliaries are automatically annotated by 
the preprocessor. 
3.2 Intermediate Verbs 
"Intermediate verb" is a term used in Quirk et 
al. (1985; pp. 138-148), defined as an occurrence 
"whose status is in some degree intermediate be- 
tween auxiliaries and main verbs." Quirk et al ar- 
range verbs on a scale ranging from modal auxiliaries 
to main verbs, and "many of the intermediate v rbs, 
particularly those at the higher end of the scale, have 
meanings associated with aspect, tense, and modal- 
ity: meanings which are primarily expressed through 
auxiliary verb constructions." 
Among the verbs tagged in our corpus, 'had', 'get', 
and 'keep' are used with intermediate function in the 
following constructions: 'had better' (or 'had best') 
and 'have got to' (called "modal idioms" by Quirk 
et al), 'have to' (called a "semi-auxiliary"), 'get' + 
-ed participle, and 'keep' + -ing participle (which 
are given the title "catenatives'). 
Some but not all of these are represented by senses 
in WordNet (and none are identified as having this 
special function). Since WordNet senses cannot be 
consistently assigned to these occurrences, we use a 
new tag, "int", in place of a sense number (or in ad- 
dition to one, when there is an appropriate sense), 
creating a new category, as we did with the auxil- 
iaries. 
An  example of an intermediate verb occurrence 
is the following. Note that sense 5 of 'have' is an 
appropriate WordNet sense for this occurrence: 
Apple II owners, for example, had_(have_to 
verbJnt 5) to use their television sets as 
screens and stored data on audiocassettes. 
These intermediate occurrences can also be recog- 
nized with good accuracy, and so are also added to 
the corpus by the preprocessor. 
The auxiliary and intermediateuses of 'have' to- 
gether represent well over half of the occurrences, 
so breaking these out as separate categories enables 
the preprocessor to assist the tagger greatly. In ad- 
dition, it would allow for separate evaluation of an 
automatic classifier tagging 'have'. 
4 Verb  Id ioms 
4.1 Manual Annotation 
The occurrence of a variety of verb idioms---semantic 
units consisting of a verb followed by a particle or 
other modifying word--accounted for a recognizable 
segment--about 6%-  of the tagged data. For exam- 
ple: 
The borrowing to raise these funds would 
be paid_(pay_off verb I) off as assets of sick 
thrifts are sold. 
WordNet does not provide entries for all idioms, 
and the entries it does provide do not always include 
a sense for the occurrences observed in the corpus. 
It is important o recognize idioms, because in- 
terpreting their constituent words separately would 
often change the meaning of the sentence (cf., e.g., 
9 
Wilks 1977 and Wilensky & Arens 1980). Our cod- 
ing instructions specify that the tagger should at- 
tempt to identify idioms even if WordNet does not 
provide an entry for it. The preprocessor assists in 
this task, by identifying potential idioms. 
The following axe strategies we found useful in 
dealing with the difficult problem of manually iden- 
tifying idioms. 
1. Does the word following the verb cease to have 
any of its usual or literal meanings as supplied 
by WordNet when used with that verb? 
If America can keep_(keep.up verb 
1) up the present situation ... the 
economies of these countries would be 
totally restructured to be able to al- 
most sustain growth by themselves. 
The 'situation' here does not need to be kept 
in a lofty position, but rather maintained. The 
use of 'up' as a particle takes away its literal, 
physical meaning, and attaches it semantically 
to 'keep', making an idiom definition necessary. 
2. Could the idiom be replaced with a single verb 
which has the same meaning? 
For example: 
But the New York Stock Exchange 
chairman said he doesn't support 
reinstating a "collar" on program 
trading, arguing that firms could 
get_(get_around verb 2) around such a 
limit. 
WordNet's entry for this sense of "get around" 
includes as synonyms "avoid" and "bypass", 
which, if used in place of the idiom, do not 
change the meaning of the sentence. 
3. Would the particle be mistaken for a preposition 
beginning a prepositional phrase-and thereby 
changing the meaning of the sentence--if viewed 
as separate from the main verb? 
Consider this example: 
Coleco failed to come_(come.up_with 
verb 1) up with another winner and 
filed for bankruptcy-law protection ... 
This example actually meets all three criteria. 
'Come up with' must be considered a single id- 
iom partly to avoid a literal interpretation that 
would change the meaning of the sentence, as 
described in criterion (1), and it also has the 
meaning "locate", which further qualifies this 
sentence as an idiom according to criterion (2). 
10 
If this sentence were given a literal reading, per- 
haps by an automatic tagger, 'with another win- 
ner' might be identified as an acceptable prepo- 
sitional phrase. 
4.2 A Flexible Tag Format 
For the purposes of the larger project of which this 
annotation project is a part, the words are annotated 
with information in addition to the WordNet sense 
tags. A simple example is the richer part-of-speech 
tags produced by Brill's tagger (1992). We note here 
a problem that we encountered using SEMCOR's 
tag format for idioms: SEMCOR merges the compo- 
nent words of the idiom into one annotation, thereby 
making it impossible to unambiguously represent in- 
formation about he individual words. Representing 
split idioms is also a problem with this scheme. 
To maintain separate ~nnotations and also tie the 
constituents of an idiom together, we suggest he 
format below (or an analogous one), which is gener- 
ated by the preprocessor. The annotations for the 
individual words are delimited by "(wf" and 
"(/wf )". The human annotator's tags are included 
in the individual word annotations. For example, be- 
low the annotator tagged "take" with the first Word- 
Net entry for 'take place'. When there is an appro- 
priate WordNet entry for the idiom as a whole, we 
store that entry with the first word of the idiom (but 
the entry could be stored with both). Appropriate 
WordNet entries for the individual words can also 
be stored in the individual word annotations. The 
Brill part-of-speech tags illustrate other information 
we would like to retain for the individual words. 
<wf BrilIPOSffiVBD idiomffitake_place-i 
wnentry=_<take_place verb l>>took</wf> 
<wf pos=NN idiomffitake_place-2>place</wf> 
The first two lines contain the annotation for the 
first word in the idiom. It contains a Brill POS tag 
for 'take' and a WordNet entry for 'take place'. The 
string 'take-place-l' encodes the fact that this is the 
first word of a 'take place' idiom. 
The third line represents he second word in the 
idiom ('take-place-T), which is a noun ('NN'). 
An intervening adverb, for example, would sim- 
ply be represented with its own annotation placed 
between the annotations for the words in the idiom. 
5 Challenging Ambiguities 
There are some instances in the corpus that we found 
to be truly ambiguous. These instances support wo 
completely different interpretations even with the 
help of the context. For example: 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
\[\] 
m 
m 
m 
m 
\[\] 
m 
m 
m 
The group has_(have verb l?aux) forecast 
1989 revenue of 56.9 billion francs. 
In this sentence, two interpretations of the verb 
'have' are equally possible, even when the sentence 
is viewed in context: 'Have' can be seen as an auxil- 
iary, meaning that the group have themselves clone 
the forecasting, oras WordNet sense I (in which case 
'forecast' is an adjective), implying that someone 
else has given them an amount, 56.9 billion francs, 
that represents heir expected revenue. 
A problem found several times in the corpus oc- 
curred when a single verb is used in a sentence that 
has two objects, and each object suggests a differ- 
ent sense of the verb. In the sentence below, for 
example, two senses of the main verb 'have' are rep- 
resented simultaneously in the sentence. Sense 4 car- 
ties the idea of ownership, which should be applied 
to the object 'papers', while sense 3 has the meaning 
'~o experience or receive", which should be applied 
to the object 'sales'. 
PAPERS: Backe Group Inc. agreed to 
acquire Atlantic Publications Inc., which 
has_(have verb 4114) 30 community papers 
and annual sales of $7 million. 
Such cases are borderline, hovering in between two 
distinct meanings. 
6 Conc lus ion  
Data manually annotated with lexical semantics 
clearly has many applications in NLP. This pa- 
per shared our experience in manual annotation of 
WordNet senses in the Wall Street Journal Treebank 
corpus. WordNet proved to be a valuable and useful 
tool. Its wide range of senses made possible a highly 
specific level of tagging. WordNet's structure, with 
the alignment of hierarchical information and the 
addition of synsets and sample sentences, was espe- 
cially helpful. We have made some suggestions for 
consistently identifying certain uses of verbs and for 
representing tags, and have shared some guidelines 
from our annotation instructions for identifying id- 
ioms in the corpus. 
7 Acknowledgements  
References  
Brill, E. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech 
tagger. In Proc. of the Third Conference on Ap- 
plied Natural Language Processing, pp. 152-155. 
Grishman, R., Macleod, C., & Meyers, A. (1994). 
COMPLEX syntax: building a computational lex- 
icon. In Proc. 15th International Conference of 
Computational Linguistics (COLING 94). 
Hirst, G. 1987. Semantic Interpretation a d the Res- 
olution of Ambiguity. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press. 
Leacock, C., Towell, G., Voorhees, E. 1993. In Proc. 
of the ARPA Human Language Technology Work- 
shop. 
Marcus, M., Santorini, B., & Marcinkiewicz, M. 
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of En- 
glish: The Penn Treebank. Computational Lin- 
guistics 19 (2): 313-330. 
Miller, G. 1990. Special Issue, WordNet: An on-line 
lexical database. International Journal of Lexicog- 
raphy 3 (4). 
Miller, G., Chodorow, M., Landes, S., Leacock, C., 
& Thomas, R. 1994. Using a semantic concordance 
for sense identification. In Proc. ARPA Human 
Language Technology Workshop. 
Ng, H.T. & Hian, B.L. 1996. Integrating multiple 
knowledge sources to disambiguate word senses: 
an exemplar-based approach. In Proc. 34th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics (ACL-96), pp. 40--47. 
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. 
1985. A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. (New York: Long'man). 
Resnik, P. 1995. Disambiguating noun groupings 
with respect o wordnet senses. In Proc. of the 
Third Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pp. 54- 
68. 
Wilensky, R. & Arens, Y. 1980. PHRAN - a knowl- 
edge based natural language understander. In
Prac. 18th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL-80), pp. 117- 
121. 
Wilks, Y. 1977. Making preferences more active. Ar- 
tificial Intelligence 8, pp. 75-97. 
This research was supported in part by the Office 
of Naval Research under grant number N00014-95- 
1-0776. 
11 
