Referring to Displays in Multimodal Interfaces 
Daqing  He  Graeme R i tch ie  
Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, 
University of Edinburgh, 
80 South Bridge, 
Edinburgh EH1 1HN, Scotland 
daq ingd ,  g raeme~da i ,  ed. ac .  uk 
John  Lee  
Human Communicat ion  Research Centre, 
University of Edinburgh 
2 Buccleuch Place, 
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, Scotland 
j ohn@cogsci ,  ed.  ac .  uk 
Abst rac t  
A system which displays information 
graphically, and also allows natural lan- 
guage queries, should allow these queries to 
interrogate he displayed (visual) informa- 
tion. Ideally this would use some uniform 
method for processing queries both about 
the display and about the world model. 
Such a system would have to cope with am- 
biguities introduced by these two sources of 
information. These ambiguities, and a pre- 
liminary proposal for a system to deal with 
it, are the main topics of this paper. 
1 In t roduct ion 
Projects which have attempted to' integrate nat- 
ural language (NL) with graphical displays (B~s and 
Guillotin, 1992; Neal and Shapiro, 1991; Pineda, 
1989) have mainly focussed on one of two problems: 
1. How can output text be coordinated with 
graphical information displayed on the screen? 
2. How can pointing estures be coordinated with 
NL input? 
We are interested in a slightly different issue, 
namely: 
How can NL terms be used, in a relatively 
uniform way, to refer to visual objects 
on the screen as well as the objects (for 
example, database items) which they 
may denote? 
The situation we have in mind is where the computer 
system has some stored knowledge base, database 
or model, and is able to graphically display selected 
items from that store. The user wishes to inter- 
act with the system, and may wish to ask questions 
which either allude to visual features of the display 
(e.g. Is the blue zone inside the city boundary?) or 
are directly about the meaning of the display (e.g. 
What does the blue marking represent?). Such quer- 
ies require that the system have access to some rep- 
resentation ofwhat is represented onthe screen, and 
that this representation beamenable to NL or mul- 
timodal (MM) querying. 1 
2 Wor ld  Mode l  and  D isp lay  Mode l  
It is common in systems which present visual in- 
formation on the screen (e.g. GISs) for there to be 
a display model. This is an explicit representation 
of what items are currently on the screen and what 
their characteristics are. This is distinct from the 
world model which represents the facts about the 
world that the system has, which may not be dis- 
played on the screen. In such systems, the main role 
of the display model is to maintain the visual display 
in an orderly fashion, and to connect screen objects 
to world (or database) objects. It must be updated 
systematically as items appear, disappear or move 
on the screen. Very often, the display model is quite 
a low-level structure, as it performs basic housekeep- 
ing for the display. 
Our proposal is that, for NL querying of the visual 
display to be possible, the display model must con- 
tain suitable high level information i  a form which 
is accessible to an NL front-end; preferably, this form 
would be similar to, or related to, the representation 
the NL front-end uses to access the world model. 
3 I l lustrat ive Examples  
A non-spatial domain 
It might seem that queries about he visual display 
would make sense only in a domain where spatial in- 
1We shall discuss natural language, but with the as- 
sumption that working systems in a few years' time 
would operate with speech input. 
80 D. He, G. Ritchie and J. Lee 
formation is directly relevant, such as a street map 
or room plan. However, if an iconic display is being 
used to represent some non-spatial set of objects, 
it might still be desirable to use visual attributes to 
refer to these abstract icons. To make these remarks 
slightly more concrete, let us consider a (fictitious) 
example system. This system does not handle spa- 
tial information, but it uses iconic representations 
on the screen to convey database facts to the user. 
The application is a car-sales catalogue, in which 
a number of (presumably used/second-hand/pre- 
owned) cars are available for the user to browse 
through. Icons on the screen represent individual 
cars, and various characteristics of the icons convey 
attributes of the corresponding cars (Figure 1). The 
nn 
nun 
n Nun 
7,000-7,500 \ [ \ ]  blue -> 1993 N Nissan 
P Peugeot 7,500-8,000 \ [ \ ]  red -> 1994 
v Vauxhall 
\[ 8,000-8 00 \[ \]    n.,1995 F Ford 
Figure 1: A ear selection system 
size of an icon conveys the price band, the colour 
conveys the year of production, and the letter on 
each icon indicates the initial of the manufacturer. 
The user can point to icons, move icons round, or 
ask questions about them, such as What is the insur- 
ance group of the ear in the top right hand corner?, 
Is the green car a hatehback?. Notice that spatial 
phrases (in the top right hand corner) can be used, 
even though this is a non-spatial domain. Also, the 
colour adjective green would (given the coding in 
Figure 1) probably refer to the colour of the icon on 
the screen rather than the colour of the actual car, 
but a similar scenario can be imagined where a col- 
our term would be used to denote the colour of the 
actual world object. In some cases, both might be 
possible, leading to ambiguity (Wilson and Conway, 
1991). 
What is clear from this is that the mapping from 
the world model (database) to the display model is 
centrally important. In particular, if we wish to be 
able to handle questions which are explicitly about 
the visual representation, such as What does green 
represent?, the mapping itself must be accessible to 
some form of symbol querying by the NL/MM inter- 
face. 
A spat ia l  domain  
Let us now consider a (fictitious) spatial domain. 
In this domain, a 2D graphic display is being used to 
help the user plan the layout of a room. The display 
represents he overall plan, and icons are stylised im- 
ages of furnishings and fittings. In such a situation, 
the user might pose queries such as What kind of 
chair is to the right of the table ?, Would a cupboard 
fit above the table ?. Here, spatial relations are again 
used, but there is potential ambiguity as to whether 
they refer to relations in the world being modelled, 
or on the screen. An object might be "above" the 
table in the image, but "to the left" of it in reality. 
4 Leve ls  o f  ambigu i ty  
As argued above, certain forms of reference (e.g. col- 
our, spatial relations) can be ambiguous between 
visual characteristics of the display and actual char- 
acteristics of the world being modelled. For referring 
expressions, there are two levels to this ambiguity: 
Descr ibed  re ferent .  When the query interpreter 
is processing a referring expression, it has to 
determine in which model - the display model 
or the world model - the features of the object 
(e.g. colour, size) are being described, and hence 
used to indicate the referent. During this pro- 
cess, the objects in the world model and those in 
the display model should be counted as differ- 
ent even in cases where a representation relation 
exists between them. 
There may, as noted above, be ambiguity here, 
between the two models. 
I n tended re ferent .  Even if a unique object is de- 
termined (a display object such as an icon or 
a world object such as a database item), it is 
conceivable that this object is being used as 
a surrogate to refer to the corresponding ob- 
ject under the mapping relation. This can be 
illustrated using the "car" domain introduced 
earlier. In a query such as What is the price of 
the blue one?, the colour blue may be (unam- 
biguously) a display feature, indicating a blue 
icon, but the intended referent (for use in the 
price predicate) is the corresponding world ob- 
ject, not the icon (cars have prices, icons do 
Referring to Displays in Mult imodal Interfaces 81 
not). Conversely, in a command Move the 1.5 
litre car to the top of the screen, the noun phrase 
uses domain attributes to indicate a domain ob- 
ject, but the action of move is to operate on the 
corresponding display object. The third, and 
simplest, possibility is that there is no interven- 
ing use of the mapping relation - the described 
referent is itself the intended referent. 
This level of indirection can lead to ambiguity 
when the noun phrase is viewed in isolation, 
since the choice of intended referent often needs 
information from the rest of the sentence, or 
from the context, to disambiguate it. 
The consequence of this added level of ambiguity 
is that the normal way of considering the "sense" 
and "reference" of an NL phrase has to be recon- 
sidered. Instead of the usual two-level approach in 
which a symbolic description (the sense) is evalu- 
ated, matched, or otherwise processed to produce 
a particular set of objects (the reference), we need 
a three-level approach allowing for sense, described 
referent, and intended referent. All of these have to 
be managed systematically, sothat the correct rela- 
tionships are maintained, and utilised, between the 
various objects. 
/y'- 
x \ 
User query user query respoose 
(semantic form) (referents resolved) to user 
Figure 2: Proposed architecture for allowing reference 
to display, world and mapping 
5 Our  a im 
The aim of our project is to devise a uniform, general 
and flexible architecture and representation mechan- 
ism by which a NL/MM query system can process 
queries about objects displayed on the screen, about 
objects in the database or world model, and about 
the relationship between these two. By "general", 
we mean that the mechanisms should not be hard- 
wired or domain-specific. We intend to produce a 
method whereby a given database and a formally 
specified visual representation scheme for the data- 
base entities can be used to interface directly with 
a domain independent NL front-end system, thus 
building a working multi-media system. 
6 P re l iminary  P roposa ls  
In order to facilitate inter-module communication, 
and to allow for possible symbolic reasoning, a high- 
level symbolic representation is needed (see figure 2). 
Pointing facilities are included in the system, com- 
bining with the graphic display and NL interpreter 
to form a multimodal system. Pointing should as- 
sist in resolving ambiguity (of described referent, not 
intended referent), but the main component for deal- 
ing with these ambiguities i  the reference model. 
It is clear that the resolving of references in such a 
system could, in general, depend upon a wide variety 
of sources of knowledge, including the following: 
Local Semant ic  P roper t ies  The noun phrase it- 
self will supply the most immediate constraints 
on choice of (described) referent, in terms of the 
head noun and its modifiers such as adjectives 
and prepositional phrases. 
Semantic Relat ions Processing of referents must 
also take account of relations which are not 
shown in the noun phrase but which involve the 
referent(s) and other display/world objects. 
Mutua l  Bel iefs The user and the system should 
know the referent object and its described fea- 
tures, and at the same time both should ac- 
knowledge that the other knows the object and 
its features as well ((Clark and Marshall, 1981), 
p57). In a multimodal environment, here are 
various ways for an object to be acknowledged 
by both dialogue participants: either it is dis- 
played on the screen, or it is mentioned in pre- 
vious dialogue, or it is part of common sense 
knowledge for both speaker and listener. A 
variety of pragmatic inferences might be pos- 
sible. For example, in the query 2 What colour 
is this/~ ?, it may be possible that either model 
is in question, but it is unlikely that the display 
property is intended because it is already clearly 
visible. Moreover, as we suggested, the display 
property may represent some other property in 
the world model, so that if the user says What is 
the price band of this/2 ?, it may be inferrable 
both that he user must mean the car (rather 
than the icon), and also that it would be appro- 
priate to give a reminder (e.g. Colour represents 
2The/~ means a pointing act happens here. 
82 D. He, G. Ritchie and J. Lee 
price band) about the depictive mapping, since 
the user is querying a directly depicted world 
property. 
Coherence The coherence of the proceeding dia- 
logue should not be damaged by an object be- 
coming the referent of the expression (Grosz 
and Sidner, 1986). 
It follows that the disambiguation process should 
be based on the following information sources: the 
world model and the display model for the sources of 
candidates and the examination of various restric- 
tions, the dialogue model for providing coherence in- 
formation about the dialogue and the user model for 
the modelling of mutual beliefs. In practice, our pro- 
ject is too limited to explore all of these issues, and 
we intend to leave aside issues of mutual belief (that 
is, our "user model" will be degenerately simple). 
It seems plausible that the consideration of de- 
scribed referents could be restricted, in this more 
limited project, to the use of "Local Semantic Prop- 
erties" (in the above list). As argued in another 
context (Ritchie, 1976; Ritchie, 1983), broader se- 
mantic onstraints ( uch as relations to other objects 
or even existence inthe current situation) are largely 
concerned with the eventual referent, rather than su- 
perficial aspects of how it happens to be described. 
Even the question of whether a phrase is a semantic- 
ally compatible subject or object of a particular verb 
is a constraint on the referent, not the symbolic ex- 
pression describing it. In the revised three-level ar- 
rangement suggested earlier, such constraints would 
be on the intended referent rather than the described 
referent. That is, in a sentence like "What kind of 
fuel-injection system does the blue one have?" the 
constraint that the referent must be a type of ob- 
ject which can have a fuel-injection system is to be 
imposed upon the intended referent. 
This suggests, at least superficially, that the 
described referent might be calculated relatively 
simply using just the properties of the noun phrase, 
without much inference. The more difficult ques- 
tion of determining the intended referent would then 
involve potentially complicated inference about do- 
main objects, etc. This would allow a two stage 
referent determination approach: find the described 
referent, then compute possible intended referents. 
As a benefit of this approach, a pointing action, 
which can be seen as a short way to indicate a 
described referent, could be included in a modular 
fashion. 
During these inferences (particularly the search 
for intended referents), a variety of sources of in- 
formation may affect the result. It is therefore ne- 
cessary to have some mechanisms which allow the 
interaction of these disparate sources. It is possible 
that some of the constraint-satisfaction suggestions 
of (Mellish, 1985) might be useful. 
If none of the available sources of information re- 
solve the ambiguities, then the query as a whole is 
ambiguous, but it seems unlikely that this would 
happen in practice. The challenge is that the pro- 
cessing method should be equally effective at making 
use of these sources of disambiguation. Our object- 
ive is to allow for as much flexibility as we can in 
the referential phenomena, but we acknowledge in- 
evitable limitations. 
Acknowledgements: The first author (Daqing 
He) is supported by a Colin & Ethel Gordon Schol- 
arship from the University of Edinburgh. 
References 
B~s, G. and Guillotin, T. (1992). A natural lan- 
guage and graphics interface, results and perspect- 
ives the A CORD project. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
Germany. 
Clark, H. and Marshall, C. (1981). Definite refer- 
ence and mutual knowledge. In Joshi, A., Webber, 
B., and Sag, I., editors, Elements of discourse un- 
derstanding, chapter 1, pages 10-63. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Grosz, B. J. and Sidner, C. (1986). Attention, In- 
tentions, and the Structure of Discourse. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 12(3):175-204. 
Mellish, C. S. (1985). Computer interpretation 
of natural language descriptions. Ellis Horwood 
series in artificial intelligence. Ellis Horwood. 
Neal, J. and Shapiro, S. (1991). Intelligent Multi- 
media Interface Technology. In Sullivan, J. and 
Tyler, S., editors, Intelligent User Interfaces, 
pages 11-44. ACM Press. 
Pineda, L. A. (1989). GRAFLOG: A Theory of Se- 
mantics fro Graphics with Applications to Human- 
Computer Interaction and CAD Systems. PhD 
thesis, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh UK. 
Ritchie, G. (1976). Problems in local semantic pro- 
cessing. In Proceedings of AISB Conference, pages 
234-241, Edinburgh, Scotland. 
Ritchie, G. (1983). Semantics in parsing. In King, 
M., editor, Parsing Natural Language, pages 199- 
217. Academic Press, North Holland. 
Wilson, M. and Conway, A. (1991). Enhanced inter- 
action style for user interfaces. IEEE Computer 
Graphics and Applications, 11 (2) :79-90. 
m 
