A Dialogue Analysis Model with Statistical Speech Act 
Processing for Dialogue Machine Translation* 
J ae -won Lee  and  G i l  Chang K im 
Dept .  of  Computer  Sc ience and  CA IR  
Korea  Advanced Ins t i tu te  of Sc ience and  
Techno logy ,  Tae jon ,  305-701, Korea  
{ j wonl ee, gckim}Ocsone, kaist, ac. kr 
Jungyun Seo 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Sogang University 
Seoul, 121-742, Korea 
seo?nlpeng, sogaag, ac. kr 
Abst ract  
In some cases, to make a proper trans- 
lation of an utterance in a dialogue, the 
system needs various information about 
context. In this paper, we propose a sta- 
tistical dialogue analysis model based on 
speech acts for Korean-English dialogue 
machine translation. The model uses syn- 
tactic patterns and N-grams reflecting the 
hierarchical discourse structures of dia- 
logues. The syntactic pattern includes the 
syntactic features that are related with the 
language dependent expressions of speech 
acts. The N-gram of speech acts based 
on hierarchical recency approximates the 
context. Our experimental results with 
trigram showed that the proposed model 
achieved 78.59 % accuracy for the top can- 
didate and 99.06 % for the top four candi- 
dates even though the size of the training 
corpus is relatively small. The proposed 
model can be integrated with other ap- 
proaches for an efficient and robust anal- 
ysis of dialogues. 
1 Introduction 
Recently, special concerns are paid to research on di- 
alogue machine translation. Many different aspects 
of dialogue, however, make it difficult to translate 
spoken language with conventional machine transla- 
tion techniques. One of the reasons is that a surface 
utterance may represent several ambiguous mean- 
ings depending on context. That means such utter- 
ance can be translated into many different ways de- 
pending on context. Interpreting this kind of utter- 
ances often requires the analysis of contexts. There- 
fore, the discourse structure of a dialogue plays a 
very important role in translating the utterances in 
the dialogue. Discourse structures of dialogues are 
usually represented as hierarchical structures which 
*This research is supported in part by the ministry of 
information and communication of Korea. 
reflect embedding subdialogues (Grosz and Sidner 
1986). 
Many researchers have studied the way how to 
analyze dialogues. One of the representative ap- 
proaches is the plan-based method (Litman et al 
1987; Caberry 1989). Considering that our dia- 
logue translation system is to be combined with 
the speech system to develop an automatic translat- 
ing telephone, however, the plan-based approach as 
some limitations. In an automatic translating tele- 
phone environment, he system must make one cor- 
rect translated target sentence for each source sen- 
tence and must be able to respond in real time. How- 
ever, the plan inference is computationally expensive 
and is hard to be scaled up. In order to overcome 
such limitations, we have focused on defining mini- 
mal approach which uses knowledgebase assmall as 
possible while it can handle ambiguous utterances. 
This paper presents an efficient discourse anal- 
ysis model using statistical speech act processing 
for Korean-English dialogue machine translation. In 
this model, we suggest a probabilistic model which 
uses surface syntactic patterns and the N-gram of 
speech act reflecting the hierarchical structures of 
dialogues to decide the speech act of an input sen- 
tence and to maintain a discourse structure. The 
proposed model consists of two steps : (1) identify- 
ing the syntactic pattern of an utterance (2) calcu- 
lating the plausibility for possible speech acts and 
discourse relations. 
After presenting some motivational examples in 
section 2, we discuss the statistical speech act .pro- 
cessing model to analyze discourse structure in sec- 
tion 3. In section 4, we describe a method to ana- 
lyze dialogue structure using the proposed statistical 
speech act processing. We discuss experimental re- 
sults for the proposed model in section 5. Finally, 
we draw some conclusions. 
2 Mot ivat ion  
Translation of dialogues often requires the analysis 
of contexts. That is, a surface utterance may be 
translated ifferently depending on context. In this 
10 
section, we present some motivational examples. 
The word 'yey q in Korean has a number of En- 
glish expression such as 'yes', 'no', 'O.K:', 'Hello', 
'thanks', and so on (Jae-woong Choe 1996). When 
the speech act of the utterance 'yey' is response, it
must be translated as 'yes' or 'no'. On the other 
hand, when the speech act of the utterance is ac- 
cept, it must be translated as 'O.K.' .  It is even used 
as greeting or opening in Korean. In this case, 'Hello' 
is an appropriate xpression in English. 
The verb 'kulehsupnita' in Korean, also, may 
be translated differently depending on context. 
Kulehsupnila is used to accept the previous utter- 
ance in Korean. In this case, it must be translated 
differently depending on context. The following di- 
alogue examples how such cases. 
Dialogue 1 
A : Hankwuk hotelipnikka? 
(Is it Hankwuk Hotel?) 
B : Yey, kulehsupnita. 
(Yes, It is.) 
Dialogue 2 
A : Kayksil yeyyak hasyesssupnikka? 
(Did you reserve a room?) 
B : Yey, kulehsupnita. 
(Yes, I did.) 
To differentiate such cases, a translation system 
must analyze the context of a dialogue. Since a dia- 
logue has a hierarchical structure than a linear struc- 
ture, the discourse structure of a dialogue must be 
analyzed to reflect the context in translation. There 
are the previous plan-based approaches for analyz- 
ing context in dialogues. Since it is very difficult 
to have a complete knowledge, it is not easy to find 
a correct analysis using such knowledge bases. In 
this paper, we propose a statistical dialogue analy- 
sis model based on speech acts for dialogue machine 
translation. Such model is weaker than the dialogue 
analysis model which uses many difference source ,of 
knowledge. However, it is more efficient and robust, 
and easy to be scaled up. We believe that this kind 
of minimal approach is more appropriate for a trans- 
lation system. 
3 Statistical Speech Act Processing 
We construct a statistical dialogue model based on 
speech acts as follows. 
Let D denote a dialogue which consists of a se- 
quence of n utterances, U1, U2 . . . .  , Un, and let Si 
denote the speech act of Ui. With this notation, 
1All notations for Korean follow Yale Romanization 
System notation. 
Sentence Type \[ 
 - Assert YN-Quest 
WH-Quest 
- Imperative 
Main-Verb 
t PV A
FRAG 
LEXEME 
Aux-Verb I Clue-Word I 
Must t yey Want aniyo 
Intent kulemyen 
Possible ... 
Serve 
Serve_to 
May 
Intend 
Figure 1: A Syntactic Pattern 
P(UilUt,U2,...,U i-l) means the probability that 
Ui will be uttered given a sequence of utterances 
U1,U2,...,Ui-1. As shown in the equation (1), 
we can approximate P(UilU1, U2,..., Ui-1) by the 
product of the sentential probability P(UilSi) and 
the contextual probability P(SilS1,S2,...,Si-1) 
(Nagata and Morimoto 1994). In subsequent sec- 
tions, we describe the details for each probability. 
P(UitU~, U2,..., U,_,) (1) 
P(U, IS~)P( S,\[S1, $2 ..... S,_a ). 
3.1 Sentent ia l  P robab i l i ty  
There is a strong relation between the speaker's 
speech act and the surface utterances expressing 
that speech act (Allen 1989 ; Andernach 1996). That  
is, the speaker utters a sentence which most well 
expresses his/her intention (speech act). This sen- 
tence allows the hearer to infer what the speaker's 
speech act is. However, a sentence can be used as 
several speech acts depending on the context of the 
sentence. 
The sentential probability P(Ui ISi) represents the 
relationship between the speech acts and the features 
of surface sentences. In this paper, we approximate 
utterances with a syntactic pattern, which consists 
of the selected syntactic features. 
We decided the syntactic pattern which consists 
of the fixed number of syntactic features. Sentence 
Type, Main- Verb, Aux- Verb, Clue- Word are selected 
as the syntactic features since they provide strong 
cues to infer speech acts. The features of a syntactic 
pattern with possible entries are shown in figure 1. 
? Sentence Type represents the mood of an ut- 
terance. Assert, YN-Quest, WH-Quest, Imper- 
ative are possible sentence types. 
? Main- Verb is the type of the main verb in the 
utterance. PA is used when the main verb rep- 
resents a slate and PV for the verbs of type 
11 
Table 1: A part of the syntactic patterns extracted from corpus 
Speech Act Sentence Type Main- Verb Aux- Verb Clue Word 
Request-Act Imperative PV Request None 
Request-Act YN-Quest PV Possible None 
Request-Act Assert PV Want None 
Ask-Ref WH-Quest PV None None 
Ask-Ref YN-Quest PJ None None 
Ask-Ref Imperative malhata Request None 
Inform Assert PJ None None 
Inform Assert PV None None 
Request-Conf YN-Quest PJ None None 
Request-Conf YN-Quest FRAG None None 
Response Assert PJ None yey 
Suggest Wh-Quest PV Serve None 
event or action. Utterances without verbs be- 
long to FRAG (fragment). In the case of per- 
formative verbs (ex. promise, request, etc.), 
lexical items are used as a Main-Verb because 
these are closely tied with specific speech acts. 
? Aux-Verb represents the modality such as 
Want, Possible, Must, and so on. 
? Clue-Word is the special word used in the ut- 
terance having particular speech acts, such as 
Yes, No, O.K., and so on. 
We extracted 167 pairs of speech acts and syntac- 
tic patterns from a dialogue corpus automatically 
using a conventional parser. As the result of ap- 
plying these syntactic patterns to all utterances in 
corpus, we found that the average number of speech 
act ambiguity for each utterance is 3.07. Table 1 
gives a part of the syntactic patterns extracted from 
corpus. 
Since a syntactic pattern can be matched with 
several speech acts, we use sentential probability, 
P(UilSi) using the probabilistic score calculated 
from the corpus. Equation (2) represents the ap- 
proximated sentential probability. F denotes the 
syntactic pattern and freq denotes the frequency 
count of its argument. 
P(U~IS,) ~ P(LIS,) = freq(Fi, Si) 
fTeq(Si) (2) 
3.2 Contextua l  Probab i l i ty  
The contextual probability P(SilS1, $2, . . . ,  Si-1) is 
the probability that n utterances with speech act 
Si is uttered given that utterances with speech act 
$1, $2, ? ?., Si-1 were previously uttered. Since pre- 
vious speech acts constrain possible speech acts in 
the next utterance, contextual information have an 
important role in determining the speech act of an 
utterance. For example, if an utterance with ask-ref 
speech act uttered, then the next speech act would 
be one of response, request-conf, and reject. In this 
case, response would be the most likely candidate. 
The following table shows an example of the speech 
act bigrams. 
Si--1 Si Ratio 
ask-ref response 58.46 
ask-ref request-confirm 18.46 
ask-ref ask-if 7.69 
ask-ref ask-ref 3.08 
ask-ref suggest 3.08 
ask-ref inform 1.54 
This table shows that response is the most likely 
candidate speech act of the following utterance of 
the utterances with ask-refspeech act. Also, request- 
confirm and ask-if are probable candidates. 
Since it is impossible to consider all preceding ut- 
terances $1, $2, . . . ,  Si-1 as contextual information, 
we use the n-gram model. However, simply using 
n utterances linearly adjacent to an utterance as 
contextual information has a problem due to sub- 
dialogues which frequently occurred in a dialogue. 
Let's consider an example dialogue. 
In dialogue 3, utterances 3-4 are part of an em- 
bedded segment. In utterance 3, the speaker asks for 
the type of rooms without responding to B's ques- 
12 
Dialogue 3 
1. A : I would like to reserve a room. 
2. B : What kind of room do you want? 
3. A : What kind of room do you have? 
4. B : We have single and double rooms. 
5. A : A single room, please. 
request-act 
ask-ref 
ask-ref 
response 
response 
tion (utterance 2). This subdialogue continues up 
to the utterance 4. As shown in the above exam- 
ple, dialogues cannot be viewed as a linear sequence 
of utterances. Rather, dialogues have a hierarchical 
structure. Therefore, if we use n utterances linearly 
adjacent to an utterance as a context, we cannot re- 
fleet the hierarchical structure of a dialogue in the 
model. 
Therefore, we approximate the context for an ut- 
terance as speech acts of n utterances which is hi- 
erarchically recent to the utterance. An utterance 
A is hierarchically recent to an utterance B if A is 
adjacent o B in the tree structure of the discourse 
(Walker 1996). Equation (3) represents the approxi- 
mated contextual probability in terms of hierarchical 
recency in the case of using trigram. In this equa- 
tion, Ui is adjacent o Uj and Uj is adjacent o Uk 
in the discourse structure, where 1 _< j < k _< i -  1 . 
P(SilS1,S2 . . . .  ,& - l )  '~' P(SilSj,S~). (3) 
RA = 
RI  = 
? request- ~acce  action pt/e 
JRC/ 
RI/ 
ask-if/ Q~respo  
O ask-ref _ nse _ O 
request- R~con fi 
O confirm rm/e O RC : ~ 
4 D iscourse  S t ructure  Ana lys i s  
Now we can define a discourse structure analysis 
model with the statistical speech act processing. 
Formally, choose Si which maximizes the following 
probability 
max P( F~IS~ )P( S~ISj, Sk ). (4) 
S, 
where Si is a possible speech act for the utterance 
Ui. Uj and Uk are the utterances which Uj is hi- 
erarchically adjacent o Ui, and Uk to Uj, where 1 
<_j<k<_ i -1 .  
In equation (4), one problem is to search all pos- 
sible Uj that Ui can be connected to. We use the 
dialogue transition etworks (DTN) and a stack for 
maintaining the dialogue state efficiently. The di- 
alogue transition etworks describe possible flow of 
speech acts in dialogues as shown in figure 2 (Seo 
et al 1994, Jin Ah Kim et al 1995). Since DTN 
is defined using recursive transition etworks, it can 
handle recursively embedded subdialogues. It works 
just like the RTN parser (Woods 1970). If a subdi- 
alogue is initiated, a dialogue transition etwork is 
initiated and a current state is pushed on the stack. 
On the other hand, if a subdialogue is ended, then a 
GI  : (3 
inform/ 
response 
RI/ -~"-k...J 
Figure 2: A part of the dialogue transition etwork 
A:request 
acti?n~t'--) 
RA- I  : v ; i  
k-ref ~O B : response~ 
RI - I I  u3 u4 
Figure 3: The transitions of dialogue 3 
13 
dialogue transition network is ended and a current 
state is popped from the stack. This process contin- 
ues until a dialogue is finished. 
With DTN and the stack, the system makes ex- 
pectations for all possible speech acts of the next 
utterance. For example, let us consider dialogue 3. 
Figure 3 shows the transitions with the dialogue 3. 
In utterance 2, according to the RA diagram 
in figure 2, B may request-confirm or request- 
il~formation. Since B asks for the type of rooms, 
push operation occurs and a RI diagram is initi- 
ated. In utterance 3, A doesn't know the possible 
room sizes, hence asks B to provide such informa- 
tion. Therefore, push operation occurs again and a 
new RI diagram is initiated. This diagram is con- 
tinued by response in utterance 4. In utterance 5, 
this diagram is popped from the stack by response 
for ask-refin utterance 2. 
In this state, some cases can be expected for the 
next utterance. The first case is to clarify the ut- 
terance 5. The second case is to return to the ut- 
terance 1. The last case is to introduce a new sub- 
dialogue. Therefore, if we assume that ask-if and 
request-confirm are possible from the syntactic pat- 
tern of the next utterance, then the following table 
can be expected for the next utterance from the di- 
alogue transition networks. 
Uk Uj U~ 
(0:-:init) (0:-:init) (6:B:ask-if) 
(2:B:ask-ref) (5:A:response) (6:B:ask-if) 
(2:B:ask-ref) (5:A:response) (6:B:request-conf) 
(0:-:init) (l:A:request-act) (6:B:ask-if) 
Since DTN has the same expressive power as 
ATN(Augmented Transition Network) grammar, we 
believe that it is not enough to cover the whole phe- 
nomenon of dialogues. However, considering the fact 
that the utterances requiring context for translation 
is relatively small, it is practically acceptable for di- 
alogue machine translation. 
5 Exper iments  and  Resu l ts  
In order to experiment the proposed model, we used 
70 dialogues recorded in real fields such as hotel 
reservation and airline reservation. These 70 dia- 
logues consist of about 1,700 utterances, 8,319 words 
total. Each utterance in dialogues was annotated 
with speech acts (SA) and with discourse structure 
information (DS). DS is an index that represents the 
hierarchical structure of discourse. Table 2 shows 
the distribution of speech acts in this dialogue cor- 
pus. The following shows a part of an annotated 
dialogue corpus. 
Table 2: The distribution of speech acts in corpus 
Speech Act Type Ratw Speech Act Type Ratio 
ask-ref ask-if 
inform response 
request-confirm request-action 
suggest confirm 
accept reject 
correct promise 
expressive greeting 
good-bye Total 
Table 3: Experimental results 
1 2 3 4 
Model I 68.48 % 74.57 % 76.09 % 76.30 % 
Model II 78.59 % 92.82 % 97.88 % 99.06 % 
/SP /hote l  
IKSlEtten pangul wenhasipnikka? 
/ES/What k ind of room do you want? 
/SA/ask-ref 
/DS/\[1\]  
/SP/customer  
IKSIEtten pangiisssupnikka? 
/ES/What k ind of room do you have? 
/SA/ask - re f  
/DS/ \ [1 ,1 \ ]  
We test two models in order to verify the efficiency 
of the proposed model. Model-I is the proposed 
model based on linear recency, where an utterance U/ 
is always connected to the previous utterance Ui-1. 
Model-II is the model based on hierarchical recency. 
Table 3 shows the average accuracy of two models. 
Accuracy figures shown in table 3 are computed 
by counting utterances that have a correct speech 
act and a correct discourse relation. In the closed 
experiments, Modelq achieved 68.48 % accuracy for 
the top candidate and 76.30 % for the top four can- 
didates. In contrast, the proposed model, Model- 
II, achieved 78.59 % accuracy for the top candidate 
and 99.06 % for the top four candidates. Errors in 
Model-I occurred, because the hierarchical structure 
of dialogues was not considered. Although dialogue 
corpus are relatively small, the experimental results 
showed that the proposed model is efficient for ana- 
lyzing dialogues. 
14 
6 Conclus ions 
In this paper, we described an efficient dialogue anal- 
ysis model with statistical speech act processing. We 
proposed a statistical method to decide a speech 
act of a sentence and to maintain a discourse struc- 
ture. This model uses the surface syntactic patterns 
of the sentence and N-gram of speech acts of the 
sentences which are discourse structurally recent to 
tile sentence. Our experimental results with trigram 
showed that the proposed model achieved 78.59 % 
accuracy for the top candidate and 99.06 % for the 
top four candidates although the size of the train- 
ing corpus is relatively small. This model is weaker 
than the dialogue analysis model which uses many 
difference source of knowledge. However, it is more 
efficient and robust, and easy to be scaled up. We 
believe that this kind of statistical approach can be 
integrated with other approaches for an efficient and 
robust analysis of dialogues. 
References 
Hwan Jin Choi, Young Hwan Oh, 1996, "Analysis of 
Intention in Spoken Dialogue Based on Learning 
of Intention Dependent Sentence Patterns", Jour- 
nal of Korea Science Information Society, Vol.23, 
No.8, pp.862-870, In Korea. 
Jae-woong Choe, 1996, "Some Issues in Conversa- 
tional Analysis : Telephone Conversations for Ho- 
tel Reservation," In Proc. of Hangul and Korean 
Language Information Processing, pp.7-16, In Ko- 
rea. 
James F. Allen, C. Raymond Perrault, 1980, "Ana- 
lyzing Intention in Utterances", Artificial Intelli- 
gence, Vol.15, pp.143-178 
Elizabeth A. Hinkelman, James F. Allen, 1989, 
"Two Constraints on Speech Act Ambiguity," In 
Proc. of th 27th Annual Meeting of the ACL, As- 
sociation of Computational Linguistics, pp.212- 
219. 
Barbara J. Grosz, Candace L. Sidner, 1986, "Atten- 
tion, Intentions, and the Structure of Discourse", 
Computational Linguistics, Vol.12, No.3, pp.175- 
204. 
Philip R. Cohen, C. Raymond Perrault, 1979, "El- 
ements of a Plan-Based Theory of Speech Acts", 
Cognitive Science, Vol.3, pp.177-212. 
Diane J. Litman, James F. Allen, 1987, "A Plan 
Recognition Model for Subdialogues in Conversa- 
tions", Cognitive Science, Vol.11, pp.163-200. 
Hiroaki Kitano, 1994, "Speech-to-Speech Transla- 
tion : A Massively Parallel Memory- Based Ap- 
proach",Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Jan Alexandersson, Elisabeth Maier, Nobert Rei- 
thinger, 1994, "A Robust and Efficient Three- 
Layered Dialogue Component for a Speech-to- 
Speech Translation System", Proc. of the 7th Eu- 
ropean Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics, pp. 188-193. 
Jin Ah Kim, Young Hwan Cho, Jae-won Lee, Gil 
Chang Kim, 1995, "A Response Generation in 
Dialogue System based on Dialogue Flow Dia- 
grams," Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim 
Symposium, pp.634-639. 
Jungyun Seo, Jae-won Lee, Jae-Hoon Kim, Jeong- 
Mi Cho, Chang-Hyun Kim, and Gil Chang Kim, 
1994, "Dialogue Machine Translation Using a Di- 
alogue Model", Proc. of China-Korea Joint Sym- 
posium on Machine Translation, pp.55-63. 
Masaaki Nagata and Tsuyoshi Morimoto, 1994, 
"First Steps towards Statistical Modeling of Di- 
alogue to Predict the Speech Act Type of the 
Next Utterance", Speech Communication, Vol.15, 
pp.193-203. 
Massko Kume, Gayle K. Sato, Kei Yoshimoto, 
1990, "A Descriptive Framework for Translat- 
ing Speaker's Meaning", Proc. of the 4th Euro- 
pean Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pp.264-271. 
Marilyn Walker and Steve Whittaker, 1990, "Mixed 
initiative in Dialogue : An Investigation i to Dis- 
course Segmentation", In Proc. of the 28th An- 
nual Meeting of the ACL, Association of Compu- 
tational Linguistics, pp.70-78. 
Sandra Caberry, 1989, "A Pragmatics-Based Ap- 
proach to Ellipsis Resolution", Computational 
Linguistics, Vol.15, No.2, pp.75-96. 
Toine Andernach, 1996, "A Machine Learning Ap- 
proach to the Classification of Dialogue Utter- 
ances", Proceedings of NeMLaP-2, Bilkent Uni- 
versity, Turkey. 
Marilyn A. Walker, 1996, "Limited Attention and 
Discourse Structure,", Computational Linguistics, 
Vol.22, No.2, pp.255-264. 
Woods, W. A., 1970, "Transition Network Gram- 
mars for Natural Language Analysis," Commun. 
of the ACM, Vol.13, pp.591-606. 
15 
