A Perspective on Word Sense Disambiguation Methods 
and Their Evaluation 
Philip Resnik 
Dept. of Linguistics/UMIACS 
University of Maryland 
College Park, MD 20742 
resnik@umiacs, umd. edu 
David Yarowsky 
Dept. of Computer Science/CLSP 
Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore, MD 21218 
yarowsky@cs, jhu.  edu 
Abstract 
In this position paper, we make several 
observations about the state of the art in 
automatic word sense disambiguation. Mo- 
tivated by these observations, we offer sev- 
eral specific proposals to the community re- 
garding improved evaluation criteria, com- 
mon training and testing resources, and the 
definition of sense inventories. 
1 Introduction 
Word sense disambiguation (WSD) is perhaps the 
great open problem at the lexical level of natural 
language processing. If one requires part-of-speech 
tagging for some task, it is now possible to obtain 
high performance off the shelf; if one needs morpho- 
logical analysis, software and lexical data are not too 
hard to find. In both cases, performance of state- 
of-the-art systems is respectable, if not perfect, and 
the fundamentals of the dominant approaches (noisy 
channel models for tagging, two-level morphology) 
are by now well understood. For word sense disam- 
biguation, we have a far longer way to go. 
2 Observat ions 
Observation 1. Evaluation of  word sense dis- 
ambiguation systems is not yet standardized. 
Evaluation of many natural language processing 
tasks including part-of-speech tagging and parsing 
has become fairly standardized, with most reported 
studies using common training and testing resources 
such as the Brown Corpus and Penn Treebank. Per- 
formance measures include a fairly well recognized 
suite of metrics including crossing brackets and pre- 
cision/recall of non-terminal label placement. Sev- 
eral researchers (including Charniak, Collins and 
Magerman) have facilitated contrastive evaluation of 
their parsers by even training and testing on identi- 
cal segments of the Treebank. Government funding 
agencies have accelerated this process, and even the 
task of anaphora resolution has achieved an evalua- 
tion standard under the MUC-6 program. 
In contrast, most previous work in word sense dis- 
ambiguation has tended to use different sets of poly- 
semous words, different corpora and different eval- 
uation metrics. Some clusters of studies have used 
common test suites, most notably the 2094-word Hne 
data of Leacock et al (1993), shared by Lehman 
(1994) and Mooney (1996) and evaluated on the sys- 
tem of Gale, Church and Yarowsky (1992). Also, re- 
searchers have tended to keep their evaluation data 
and procedures somewhat standard across their own 
studies for internally consistent comparison. Never- 
theless, there are nearly as many test suites as there 
are researchers in this field. 
Observation 2. The  potential for WSD varies 
by task. As Wilks and Stevenson (1996) empha- 
size, disambiguating word senses is not an end in 
itself, but rather an intermediate capability that is 
believed -- but not yet proven -- to improve natu- 
ral language applications. It would appear, however, 
that different major applications of language differ in 
their potential to make use of successful word sense 
information. In information retrieval, even perfect 
word sense information may be of only limited util- 
ity, largely owing to the implicit disambiguation that 
takes place when,multiple words within a query 
match multiple words within a document (Krovetz 
and Croft, 1992). In speech recognition, sense in- 
formation is potentially most relevant in the form of 
word equivalence classes for smoothing in language 
models, but smoothing based on equivalence classes 
of contexts (e.g. (Bahl et al, 1983; Katz, 1987)) has 
a far better track record than smoothing based On 
classes of words (e.g. (Brown et al, 1992)). 
The potential for using word senses in machine 
translation seems rather more promising. At the 
level of monolingual lexical information useful for 
high quality machine translation, for example, there 
79 
is good reason to associate information about syn- 
tactic realizations of verb meanings with verb senses 
rather than verb tokens (Don' and Jones, 1996a; 
1996b). And of course unlike machine translation or 
speech recognition, the human process followed in 
completing the task takes exp\]\]icit account of word 
senses, in that translators make use of correspon- 
dences in bilingual dictionaries organized according 
to word senses. 
Observation 3. Adequately large sense- 
tagged data sets are difficult to obtain. Avail- 
ability of data is a significant factor contributing 
to recent advances in part-of-speech tagging, pars- 
ing, etc. For the most successful approaches to such 
problems, correctly annotated ata are crucial for 
training learning-based algorithms. Regardless of 
whether or not learning is involved, the prev~illng 
evaluation methodology requires correct est sets in 
order to rigorously assess the quality of algorithms 
and compare their performance. 
Unfortunately, ofthe few sense-annotated corpora 
currently available, virtually all are tagged collec- 
tions of a single ambiguous word such as line or 
tank. The only broad-coverage annotation of all the 
words in a subcorpus i the WordNet semantic on- 
cordance (Miller et ai., 1994). This represents a very 
important contribution to the field, providing the 
first large-scale, balanced ata set for the study of 
the distributional properties of polysemy in English. 
However, its utility as a tr~inlng and evaluation re- 
source for supervised sense taggers is currently some- 
what limited by its token-by-token sequential tag- 
ging methodology, ielding too few tagged instances 
of the large majority of polysemous words (typically 
fewer than 10 each), rather than providing much 
larger training/testing sets for a selected subset of 
the vocabulary. In addition, sequential ~nnotation 
forces annotators to repeatedly refamiliarize them- 
selves with the sense inventories of each word, slow- 
ing ~nnotation speed and lowering intra- and inter- 
annotator agreement rates. Nevertheless, the Word- 
Net semantic hierarchy itself is a central training 
resource for a variety of sense disambiguation algo- 
rithms and the existence of a corpus tagged in this 
sense inventory is a very useful complementary e- 
source, even if small. 
The other major potential source of sense-tagged 
data comes from parallel aligned bilingual corpora. 
Here, translation distinctions can provide a practi- 
cal correlate to sense distinctions, as when instances 
of the English word duty translated to the French 
words devoir and droit correspond to the mono- 
lingual sense distinction between dUty/OBLIGATION 
and duty/TAX. Current offerings of parallel bilingual 
corpora re limited, but as their availability and di- 
versity increase they offer the possibility of limitless 
'~agged" training data without he need for manual 
annotation. 
Given the data requirements for supervised learn- 
ing algorithms and the current paucity of such data, 
we believe that unsupervised and minimally super- 
vised methods offer the primary near-term hope 
for broad-coverage s nse tagging. However, we see 
strong future potential for supervised algorithms us- 
ing many types of aligned bilingual corpora for many 
types of sense distinctions. 
Observation 4. The field has narrowed down 
approaches, but  only a little. In the area of part- 
of-speech tagging, the noisy channel model domi- 
nates (e.g. (Bald and Mercer, 1976; Jelinek, 1985; 
Church, 1988)), with transformational role-based 
methods (Brill, 1993) and grammatico-statistical hy- 
brids (e.g. (Tapanainen and Voutilainen, 1994)) also 
having a presence. Regardless of which of these ap- 
proaches one takes, there seems to be consensus on 
what makes part-of-speech tagging successful: 
? The inventory of tags is small and fairly standard. 
? Context outside the current sentence has little in- 
fluence. 
? The within-sentence d pendencies are very local. 
? Prior (decontextuaUzed) probabilities dominate in 
many cases. 
? The task can generally be accomplished success- 
fully using only tag-level models without lexical 
sensitivities besides the priors. 
? Standard annotated corpora of adequate size have 
long been available. 
Table 1: Some properties of the POS tagging task. 
In contrast, approaches to WSD attempt o take 
advantage of many different sources of information 
(e.g. see (McRoy, 1992; Ng and Lee, 1996; Bruce 
and Wiebe, 1994)); it seems possible to obtain ben- 
efit from sources ranging from local collocational 
clues (Yarowsky, 1993) to membership in semanti- 
cally or topically related word classes (?arowsky, 
1992; Resnik, 1993) to consistency of word usages 
within a discourse (Gale et al, 1992); and disam- 
bignation seems highly lexically sensitive, in effect 
requiring specialized isamhignators for each poly- 
semous word. 
80 
3 Proposa ls  
Proposal 1. A better evaluation criterion. At 
present, the standard for evaluation of word sense 
disambiguation algorithms is the "exact match" cri- 
terion, or simple accuracy: 
% correct = 100 x # exactly matched sense tags 
# assigned sense tags 
Despite its appealing simplicity, this criterion suf- 
fers some obvious drawbacks. For example, consider 
the context: 
... bought an interest in Lydak Corp .... (1) 
and assume the existence of 4 hypothetical systems 
that assign the probability distribution in Table 2 to 
the 4 major senses of interest. 
Sense 
(1) monetary (e.g. on a loan) 
(2) stake or share ,tffi correct 
(3) benefit/advantage/sake 
(4) intellectual curiosity 
System 
1 2 3 4 
.47 .85 .28 1.00 
.42 .05 .24 .00 
.06 .05 .24 .00 
.05 .05 .24 .00 
Table 2: Probability distributions assigned by four 
hypothetical systems to the example context (1) 
above. 
Each of the systems assigns the incorrect classifi- 
cation (sense 1) given the correct sense 2 Ca stake or 
share). However System 1 has been able to nearly 
rule out senses 3 and 4 and assigns reasonably high 
probability to the correct sense, but is given the 
same penalty as other systems that either have ruled 
out the correct sense (systems 2 and 4) or effectively 
claim ignorance (system 3). 
If we intend to use the output of the sense tag- 
ger as input to another probabilistic system, such 
as a speech recognizer, topic classifier or IR system, 
it is important hat the sense tagger yield proba- 
bilities with its classifications that are as accurate 
and robust as possible. If the tagger is confident 
in its answer, it should assign high probability to 
its chosen classification. If it is less confident, but 
has effectively ruled out several options, the assigned 
probability distribution should reflect his too. 
A solution to this problem comes from the speech 
community, where cross-entropy (or its related mea- 
sures perplexity and Kullback-Leibler distance) are 
used to evaluate how well a model assigns probabil- 
ities to its predictions. The easily computable for- 
mula for cross entropy is 
N 
-- N i~-~1 log2 Pr~4 (ca, \[wi, c?ntext') 
where N is the number of test instances and Pr~t is 
the probability assigned by the algorithm A to the 
correct sense, c.sl of polysemous word wi in contexti. 
Crucially, given the hypothetical case above, the 
sense disambiguation algorithm in System 1 would 
get much of the credit for assigning high probabil- 
ity, even if not the highest probability, to the correct 
sense. Just as crucially, an algorithm would be pe- 
nalized heavily for assigning very low probability to 
the correct sense, I as illustrated below: 
Illustration of Cross- System 
Entropy Calculation 1 2 3 4 
PrA(csi\[wl, contexti) .42 .05 .24 .00 
-log2Pr.4(cs~lw~,context~ ) 1.25 4.32 2.05 ov 
In aggregate, optimal performance is achieved un- 
der this measure by systems that assign as accurate 
a probability estimate as possible to their classifica- 
tions, neither too conservative (System 3) nor too 
overconfident (Systems 2 and 4). 
This evaluation measure does not necessarily ob- 
viate the exact match criterion, and the two could 
be used in conjunction with each other since they 
make use of the same test data. However, a measure 
based on cross-entropy or perplexity would provide 
a fairer test, especially for the common case where 
several fine-grained senses may be correct and it is 
nearly impossible to select exactly the sense chosen 
by the human annotator. 
Finally, not all classification algorithms return 
probability values. For these systems, and for those 
that yield poorly estimated values, a variant of 
the cross entropy measure without the log term 
(~ ~'\]~I Pr-a(csdwi, contexti)) can be used to mea- 
sure improvement in restricting and/or roughly or- 
dering the possible classification set without exces- 
sive penalties for poor or absent probability esti- 
mates. In the latter case, when the assigned tag is 
given probability 1 and all other senses probability 
0, this measure is equivalent to simple % correct. 
Proposa l  2. Make  eva luat ion  sens i t ive  to  
senmnt ic /conmaun lcat ive  d is tance between 
subsenses .  
Current WSD evaluation metrics also fail to take 
into account semantic/communicative distance be- 
tween senses when assigning penalties for incorrect 
labels. This is most evident when word senses are 
nested or arranged hierarchically, as shown in the 
example sense inventory for bank in Table 3. 
1The extreme case of assigning 0 probability to the 
correct sense is given a penalty of oo by the cross-entropy 
measure.  
81 
I Bank - REPOSITORY 
1.1 Financial Bank 
I.la - the institution 
I.lb - the bnllding 
1.2 General Supply/Reserve/Inventory 
II Bank - GEOGRAPHICAL 
II.1 Shoreline 
II.2 Ridge/Embanlcment 
III Bank - ARRAY/GROUP/ROW 
Table 3: Example sense inventory for bank 
An erroneous classification between close siblings 
in the sense hierarchy should be given relatively little 
penalty, while misclassifications across homographs 
should receive a much greater penalty. The penalty 
matrix distance (subsensel, subsense2) could capture 
simple hierarchical distance (e.g. (Resnik, 1995; 
Richardson et al, 1994)), derived from a single se- 
mantic hierarchy such as WordNet, or be based on 
a weighted average of simple hierarchical distances 
from multiple sources uch as sense/subsense hi rar- 
chies in several dictionaries. A very simple example 
of such a distance matrix for the bank sense hierarchy 
is given in Table 4. 
i I. la I.lb 1.2 II.l II.2 III 
I . la  0 1 2 4 4 4 
Lib 1 0 2 4 4 4 
1.2 2 2 0 4 4 4 
II.1 4 4 4 0 1 4 
II.2 4 4 4 1 0 4 
III 4 4 :t 4 4 0 
Table 4: Example distance/cost matrix for bank 
Penalties could also be based on general pairwise 
f~nctional communicative distance: errors between 
subtle sense differences would receive little penalty 
while gross errors likely to result in misunderstand- 
ing would receive a large penalty. Such communica- 
tive distance matrices could be derived from several 
sources. They could be based on psycholinguistic 
data, such as experimentally derived estimates of 
similarity or confusability (Miller and Charles, 1991; 
Resnik, 1995). They could be based on a given task, 
e.g. in speech synthesis only those sense distinction 
errors corresponding to pronunciation distinctions 
(e.g. bass-/bms/vs, bass-/beIs/) would be penal- 
ized. For the machine-translation application, only 
those sense differences lexicalized ifferently in the 
target language would he penalized, with the penalty 
proportional to communicative distance. 2 In gen- 
2Such distance could be based on the weighted % of 
all languages that lexicalize the two subsenses differently. 
eral such a distance matrix could support arbitrary 
communicative cost/penalty functions, dynamically 
changible according to task. 
There are several ways in which such a (hierar- 
chical) distance penalty weighting could be utilized 
along with the cross-entropy measure. The simplest 
is to minimize the mean distance/cost between the 
assigned sense (as~) and correct sense (csl) over all 
N examples as an independent figure of merit: 
1 N 
distance(csi, asi) 
However, one could also use a metric such as the 
following that measures efficacy of probability as- 
signment in a manner that penalizes probabilities 
assigned to incorrect senses weighted by the commu- 
nicative distance/cost between that incorrect sense 
and the correct one: 
~1 distance(cs,, sj) x Pr~(sjlw,,context,) 
i-- j= 
where for any test example i, we consider all Si 
senses (sj) of word wi, weighting the probability 
mass assigned by the classifier ,4 to incorrect senses 
(PrA(sjlwi,context~)) by the communicative dis- 
tance or cost of that misclassification. 3 
Note that in the special case of sense tagging with- 
out probability estimates (all are either 0 or 1), this 
formula is equivalent o the previous one (simple 
mean distance or cost mlnlmlzation). 
Proposal  3. A framework for common evalua- 
tion and test set  generat ion .  Supervised and un- 
supervised sense disambiguation methods have dif- 
ferent needs regarding system development and eval- 
uation. Although unsupervised methods may be 
evaluated (with some limitations) by a sequentially 
tagged corpus such as the WordNet semantic on- 
cordance (with a large number of polysemous words 
represented but with few examples of each), super- 
vised methods require much larger data sets focused 
on a subset of polysemous words to provide ade- 
quately large training and testing material. It is 
hoped that US and international sources will see 
fit to fund such a data annotation effort. To fa- 
cilitate discussion of this issue, the following is a 
proposed framework for providing this data, satisfy- 
ing the needs of both supervised and unsupervised 
tagging research. 
3Although this function enumerates over all 8i senses 
of wi, because distance(cs~,cs~) -- 0 this function only 
penalizes probability mass assigned to incorrect senses 
for the given example. 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
n 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
82 
1. Select/Collect a very large (e.g., N = 1 billion 
words), diverse unannotated corpus. 
2. Select a sense inventory (e.g. WordNet, 
LDOCE) with respect o which algorithms will 
be evaluated (see Proposal 4). 
3. Pick a subset of R < N (e.g., 100M) words of 
unannotated text, and release it to the commu- 
nity as a training set. 
4. Pick a smaller subset of S < R < N (e.g., 
10M) words of text as the source of the test set. 
Generate the test set as follows: 
(a) Select a set of M (e.g., 100) ambiguous 
words that will be used as the basis for 
the evaluation, mithout elling the research 
community what those words will be. 
(b) For each of the M words, annotate all avail- 
able instances of that word in the test cor- 
pus. Make sure each annotator tags all in- 
stances of a single word, e.g. using a con- 
cordance tool, as opposed to going through 
the corpus sequentially. 
(c) For each of the M words, compute valu- 
ation statistics using individual annotators 
against other annotators. 
(d) For each of the M words, go through the 
cases where annotators disagreed and make 
a consensus choice, by vote if necessary. 
5. Instruct participants in the evaluation to 
'~reeze" their code; that is, from this point on 
no changes may be made. 
6. Have each participating algorithm do WSD on 
the full S-word test corpus. 
7. Evaluate the performance of each algorithm 
considering only instances of the M words an- 
notated as the basis for the evaluation. Com- 
pare exact match, cross-entropy, and inter- 
judge reliability measures (e.g. Cohen's ~) us- 
ing annotator-vs-annotator results as an upper 
bound. 
8. Release this year's S-word test corpus as a de- 
velopment corpus for those algorithms that re- 
quire supervised training, so they can partici- 
pate from now on, being evaluated in the future 
via cross-validation. 
9. Go back to Step 3 for next year's evaluation. 
There are a number of advantages to this 
paradigm, in comparison with simply trying to an- 
notate large corpora with word sense information. 
First, it combines an emphasis on broad coverage 
with the advantages of evaluating on a limited set 
of words, as is done traditionally in the WSD lit- 
erature. Step 4a can involve any form of criteria 
(frequency, level of ambiguity, part of speech, etc.) 
to narrow down to set of candidate words, and then 
employ random selection among those candidates. 
At the same time, it avoids a common criticism of 
studies based on evaluating using small sets of words, 
namely that there is not enough attention being paid 
to scalability. In this evaluation paradigm, algo- 
rithms must be able to sense tag all words in the 
corpus meeting specified criteria, because there is no 
way to know in advance which words will be used to 
compute the figure(s) of merit. 
Second, the process avoids some of the problems 
that arise in using exhaustively annotated corpora 
for evaluation. By focusing on a relatively small set 
of polysemous words, much larger data sets for each 
can be produced. This focus will also allow more 
attention to be paid to selecting and vetting com- 
prehensive and robust sense inventories, including 
detailed specifications and definitions for each. Fur- 
thermore, by having annotators focus on one word at 
at time using concordance software, the initial level 
of consistency is likely to be far higher than that ob- 
tained by a process in which one jumps from word 
to word to word by going sequentially through a 
text, repeatedly refamiliarizing oneself with different 
sense inventories at each word. Finally, by comput- 
ing inter-annotator statistics blindly and then allow- 
ing annotators to confer on disagreements, a cleaner 
test set can be obtained without sacrificing trust- 
worthy upper bounds on performance. 
Third, the experience of the Penn Treebank and 
other annotation efforts has demonstrated that it 
is difflcult to select and freeze a comprehensive tag 
set for the entire vocabulary in advance. Study- 
ing and writing detailed sense tagging uidelines for 
each word is comparable to the effort required to 
create a new dictionary. By focusing on only 100 or 
so polysemous words per evaluation, the annotating 
organization can afford to do a multi-pass tudy of 
and detailed tagging guidelines for the sense inven- 
tory present in the data for each target word. This 
would be prohibitively expensive to do for the full 
English vocabulary. Also, by utilizing different sets 
of words in each evaluation, such factors as the level 
of detail and the sources of the sense inventories may 
change without worrying about maintaining consis- 
tency with previous data. 
Fourth, both unsupervised and supervised WSD 
algorithms are better accommodated in terms of the 
amount of data available. Unsupervised algorithms 
83 
Target WordNet English 
Word Sense # description Spanish French German Italian 
1 inter&, in t~t  interesse 
r~dito 
interest 
(noun) 
3,4 
drug la 
(noun) 
bank 
(noun) 
lb 
fire 1 
(t. verb) 
5 
monetary 
(e.g. on loan) 
stake/share 
intellectual 
curiosity 
benefit, 
advantage 
medicine 
narcotic 
shoreline 
embankment 
financial inst. 
supply/reserve 
bank building 
array/row 
interds, 
participacidn 
interns, 
provecho, inte- 
rns, beneficio 
medicamento, 
droga 
narcdtica 
droga 
ribera, orilla 
loma, cuesta 
banco 
banco 
baJico 
hilera, baterla 
dismiss despedir, 
from job echar 
arouse, provoke excitar, 
enardecer 
discharge weapn disparar 
bake pottery cocer 
intdr~t 
participation 
intdr~t 
intdr~t 
medicament 
Zinsen 
Anteil 
Interesse 
Interesse 
Medikament, 
Arzheimittel 
interesse 
interesse 
int~esse 
medicina 
drogue Drogue, droga 
P~u~ 
banc, rive 
talus, terasse 
Ufer 
Erdwall 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Reihe 
banque 
banque 
banque 
rang, batterie 
renvoyer feuern 
enflammer, befiiigeln 
animer entziinden 
l~:her abfeuern 
cuire brennen 
Japanese 
risE, 
risoku 
riken 
kaushin, 
kySmi 
rieki 
kusuri 
mayaku 
sponda,riva kishi 
muccio teib5 
banca gink5 
banca gink5 
bauca gink5 
batteria retsu 
licenziare kubi ni 
shimasu 
accendere kSfun 
infiammare saseru 
sparare happ5 s. 
cuocere yaku 
Table 5: Mapping between cross-finguistic sense labels and established lexicons 
can be given very large quantities of training data: 
since they require no annotation the value of R can 
be quite large. And although supervised algorithms 
are typically plagued by sparse data, this approach 
will yield much larger training and testing sets per 
word, facilitating the exploration and development 
of data intensive supervised algorithms. 
Proposal  4. A multUlngual sense inventory 
for evaluation. One of the most fraught issues 
in applied lexical semantics i how to define word 
senses. Although we certainly do not propose a 
definitive answer to that question, we suggest here 
a general purpose criterion that can be applied to 
existing sources of word senses in a way that, we 
suggest, makes sense both for target applications 
and for evaluation, and is compatible with the major 
sources of available training and test data. 
The essence of the proposal is to restrict a word 
sense inventory to those distinctions that are typ- 
ically lezicalized cross-linguistically. This cuts a 
middle ground between restricting oneself to homo- 
graphs within a single language, which tends toward 
a very coarse-grained distinction, and an attempt to 
express all the fine-grained istinctions made in a 
language, as found in monolingual dictionaries. In 
practice the idea would be to define a set of tar- 
get languages (and associated bilingual dictionaries), 
and then to require that any sense distinction be 
reAliT~d lexically in a minimum subset of those lan- 
guages. This would eliminate many distinctions that 
are arguably better treated as regular polysemy. For 
example, table can be used to refer to both a physical 
object and a group of people: 
(1) a. The waiter put the food on the table. 
b. Then he told another table their food 
was almost ready. 
c. He finally brought appetizers to the table 
an hour later. 
In German the two meanings can actually be lexi- 
calized ifferently (Tisch vs. Tischrunde). However, 
as such sense distinctions are typically conflated into 
a single word in most languages, and because ven 
German can use Tisch in both cases, one could plau- 
sibly argue for a common sense inventory for evalu- 
ation that conflates these meanings. 
A useful reference source for both training and 
evaluation would be a table linking sense numbers 
in established lexical resources (such as WordNet or 
LDOCE) with these crosslinguistic translation dis- 
tinctions. An example of such a map is given in 
Table 5. A comparable mapping could readily be 
84 
extracted semi-automatically from bilingual dictio- 
naries or from the EuroWordNet effort (Bloksma et 
al., 1996) which provides both semantic hierarchies 
and interlingnal node linkages, currently for the lan- 
guages Spanish, Italian, Dutch and English. We note 
that the table follows many lexical resources, such as 
the original WordNet, in being organized at the top 
level according to parts of speech. This seems to us 
a sensible approach to take for sense inventories, es- 
pecially in light of Wilks and Stevenson's (1996) ob- 
servation that part-of-speech tagging accomplishes 
much of the work of semantic disambignation, at 
least at the level of homographs. 
Although cross-linguistic divergence is a signifi- 
cant problem, and 1-1 translation maps do not exist 
for all sense-language pairs, this table suggests how 
multiple parallel bilingual corpora for different lan- 
gnage pairs can be used to yield sets of training data 
covering different subsets of the English sense inven- 
tory, that in aggregate may yield tagged data for 
all given sense distinctions when any one language 
alone may not be adequate. 
For example, a German-English parallel corpus 
could yield tagged data for Senses 1 and 2 for in- 
terest, and the presence of certain Spanish words 
(provecho, beneficio) aligned with interest in a 
Spanish-English corpus will tag some instances of 
Sense 5, with a Japanese-English aligned corpus po- 
tentially providing data for the remaining sense dis- 
tinctions. In some cases it will not be possible to 
find any language (with adequate on-line parallel 
corpora) that lexicalize some subtle English sense 
distinctions differently, but this may be evidence 
that the distinction is regular or subtle enough to 
be excluded or handled by other means. 
Note that Table 5 is not intended for direct use 
in machine translation. Also note that when two 
word senses are in a cell they axe not necessarily 
synonyms. In some cases they realize differences in 
meaning or contextual usage that are salient to the 
target language. However, at the level of sense dis- 
tinction given in the table, they correspond to the 
same word senses in English and the presence of ei- 
ther in an aligned bilingual corpus will indicate the 
same English word sense. 
Monolingual sense tagging of another language 
such as Spanish would yield a similar map, such as 
distinguishing the senses of the Spanish word dedo, 
which can mean 'finger' or 'toe'. Either English or 
German could be used to distinguish these senses, 
but not Italian or French, which share the same sense 
ambiguity. 
It would also be helpful for Table 5 to include 
alignments between multiple monolingual sense rep- 
resentations, such as COBUILD sense numbers, 
LDOCE tags or WordNet synsets, to support the 
sharing and leveraging of results between multiple 
systems. This brings to the fore an existing problem, 
of course: different sense inventories lead to differ- 
ent algorithmic biases. For example, WordNet as a 
sense inventory would tend to bias an evaluation in 
favor of algorithms that take advantage of taxonomic 
structure; LDOCE might bias in favor of algorithms 
that can take advantage of topical/subject codes, 
and so forth. Unfortunately we have no solution to 
propose for the problem of which representation (if 
any) should be the ultimate standard, and leave it 
as a point for discussion. 
4 Conc lus ions  
The most important of our observations about the 
state of the art in word sense disambiguation is that 
it is still a hard, open problem, for which the field 
has not yet narrowed much. We have made several 
suggestions that we believe will help assess progress 
and advance the state of the art. In summary: 
? We proposed that the accepted standard for 
WSD evaluation include a cross-entropy like 
measure that tests the accuracy of the probabil- 
ities assigned to sense tags and offers a mecha- 
nism for assigning partial credit. 
? We suggested a paradigm for common evalua- 
tion that combines the benefits of traditional 
"interesting word" evaluations with an empha- 
sis on broad cov~age and scalability. 
? We outlined a criterion that should help in de- 
terminirlg a suitable sense inventory to use for 
comparison of algorithms, compatible with both 
hierarchical sense partitions and multilingually 
motivated sense distinctions. 
References 
L. Bahl and R. Mercer. 1976. Part-of-speech as- 
sigument by a statistical decision algorithm. In 
International Symposium on Information Theory, 
Ronneby, Sweden. 
L. Bald, F. Jelinek, and R. Mercer. 1983. A max- 
imum likelihood approach to continuous speech 
recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal- 
ysis and Machine Intelligence, PAMI-5(2):179- 
190. 
L. Bloksma, P. Dfez-Orzas and P. Vossen. 1996. 
User Requirements and Functional Specification 
of the EuroWordNet Project. http:/lw~m, let. 
uva. nll-er, m. 
85 
E. Brill. 1993. A Corpus-Based Approach to Lan- 
guage Learning. Ph.D. thesis, Computer and In- 
formation Science, University of Pennsylvania. 
P. Brown, V. Della Pietra, P. deSouza, J. Lai, and 
R. Mercer. 1992. Class-based n-gram models 
of natural anguage. Computational Linguistics, 
18(4):467-480. 
R. Bruce and J. Wiebe. 1994. Word-sense disam- 
biguation using decomposable models. In Proceed- 
ings of the 3~nd Annual Meeting of the Associa- 
tion .for Computational Linguistics, Las Cruces. 
K. Church. 1988. A stochastic parts program and 
noun phrase parser for unrestricted texts. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Nat- 
ural Language Processing, Austin, Texas. 
B. Dorr and D. Jones. 1996a. Acquisition of seman- 
tic lexicons: Using word sense disarnbiguation to 
improve precision. In Proceedings ofthe SIGLEX 
Workshop on Breadth and Depth of Semantic Lex- 
icons, Santa Cruz, CA. 
B. Dorr and D. Jones. 1996b. Role of word sense dis- 
ambiguation i lexical acquisition: Predicting se- 
mantics from syntactic ues. In Proceedings ofthe 
International Conference on Computational Lin- 
guistics, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
W. Gale, K. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. 
One sense per discourse. Proceedings of the 4th 
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop. 
W. Gale, K. Church, and D. Yarowsky. A method 
for disambiguating word senses in a large corpus. 
Computers and the Humanities, 26:415-439, 1992. 
F. Jelinek. 1985. Markov source modeling of text 
generation. In J. Skwirzinski, editor, Impact of 
Processing Techniques on Communication. Dor- 
drecht. 
S. Katz. 1987. Estimation of probabilities from 
sparse data for the language model component 
of a speech recognizer. IEEE Transactions on 
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ASSP- 
35(3):400-401. 
It. Krovetz and W. B. Croft. 1992. Lexical ambigu- 
ity and information retrieval. ACM Transactions 
on Information Systems, 10(2):115-141. 
C. Leaeock, G. Towell and E. Voorhees. 1993. 
Corpus-based statistical sense resolution. In 
Proceedings, ARPA Human Language Technology 
Workshop, pp. 260-265, Plainsboro, NJ. 
J. Lehman. 1994. Toward the essential nature of 
statistical knowledge in sense resolution. In Pro- 
ceedings of the TvJelfth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 734-471. 
86 
R. Mooney. 1996. Comparative experiments on dis- 
am~i~mating word senses: An illustration of the 
role of bias in machine learning. In Proceedings of
the Con\]erence onEmpirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing, Philadelphia. 
S. McRoy. 1992. Using multiple knowledge sources 
for word sense discrimination. Computational 
Linguistics, 18(1):1-30. 
G. Miller and W. Charles. 1991. Contextual corre- 
lates of semantic similarity. Language and Cogni- 
tive Processes, 6(1):1-28. 
G. Miller, M. Chodorow, S. Landes, C. Leacock, 
and R. Thomas. 1994. Using a semantic con- 
cordance for sense identification. In Proceedings 
of the ARPA Human Language Technology Work- 
shop, San Francisco. Morgan Kaufmarm. 
H. Ng and H. Lee. 1996. Integrating multiple 
knowledge sources to disambiguate word sense: 
An exemplar-based approach. In Proceedings o.f 
the 34th Annual Meeting o.f the Society for Com- 
putational Linguistics, pp. 40-47, Santa Cruz, CA. 
P. Resnik. 1993. Selection and ln\]ormation: A
Class-Based Approach to Le~cal Relationships. 
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania. ( f tp : / /  
ftp. cis. upenn, edu/pub/ircs/tr/93-42, ps. Z). 
P. Resnik. 1995. Using information content to eval- 
uate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. In Pro- 
ceedings of the I~th International Joint Confer- 
ence on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-95). (cmp- 
lg/9511007). 
R. Richardson, A. Smeaton, and J. Murphy. 1994. 
Using WordNet as a knowledge base for measur- 
ing semantic similarity between words. Work- 
ing Paper CA-1294, Dublin City University, 
School of Computer Applications, Dublin, Ireland. 
f tp : / / f tp ,  compapp, dcu. ie/pub/w-papers/ 
1994/CA1294. ps. Z. 
P. Tapanainen and A. Voutilainen. 1994. Tagging 
accurately - don't guess if you know. In Proceed- 
ings of ANLP '94. 
Y. Wilks and M. Stevenson. 1996. The grammar 
of sense: Is word-sense tagging much more than 
part-of-speech tagging? cmp-lg/9607028. 
D. Yarowsky. 1992. Word-sense disambiguation us- 
ing statistical models of Roget's categories trained 
on large corpora. In Proceedings ofCOLING-9~, 
pp. 454-460, Nantes, Prance. 
D. Yarowsky. 1993. One sense per collocation. Pro- 
ccedings of the ARIA Human Language Technol- 
ogy Workshop, Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 266-271. 
