Supporting anaphor resolution in dialogues with a corpus-based 
probabilistic model 
Marco  Rocha  
School  of  Cogn i t ive  and Comput ing  Sc iences 
Un ivers i ty  of Sussex 
Br ighton  BN1 9QH,  U .K .  
marco@cogs ,  susx .  ac .  uk  
Abst ract  
This paper describes a corpus-based in- 
vestigation of anaphora in dialogues, us- 
ing data from English and Portuguese face- 
to-face conversations. The approach relies 
on the manual annotation of a significant 
number of anaphora cases - around three 
thousand for each language - in order to 
create a database of real-life usage which 
ultimately aims at supporting anaphora in- 
terpreters in NLP systems. Each case of 
anaphora was annotated according to four 
properties described in the paper. The 
code used for the annotation is also de- 
scribed. Once the required number of cases 
had been analysed, a probabilistic model 
was built by linking categories in each 
property to form a probability tree. The 
results are summed up in an antecedent- 
likelihood theory, which elaborates on the 
probabilities and observed regularities of 
the immediate context o support anaphor 
resolution by selecting the most likely an- 
tecedent. The theory will be tested on 
a previously annotated ialogue and then 
fine-tuned for best performance. Auto- 
matic annotation is briefly discussed. Pos- 
sible applications comprise machine trans- 
lation, computer-aided language learning, 
and dialogue systems in general. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The emergence of corpus-based approaches brought 
to the fore the importance of extensive records of 
real-life language. The technique of corpus annota- 
tion and the use of statistical measures are standard 
research tools in corpus-based approaches. This pa- 
per presents a study which relies on corpus anno- 
tation to describe anaphoric phenomena in two lan- 
guages - English and Portuguese. The investigation 
concentrates on dialogues. The London-Lund Cor- 
pus is the source of English data, whereas the Por- 
tuguese data come from a corpus collected especially 
for the purposes of this research. 
Fligelstone's (Fii92) study on anaphora bears im- 
portant similarities to the present one, as it also 
uses an annotation to describe features of anaphoric 
phenomena. The annotation created for the present 
study draws on some of the ideas which guide Fligel- 
stone's, but it is quite distinct in both form and 
content. Biber's (Bib92) systematic use of statisti- 
cal techniques to explore corpus data, together with 
the broad concept of referring expressions adopted, 
was also influential in shaping choices made for this 
project. 
Having in mind Biber's non-restrictive approach, 
anaphora is defined, for the purposes of this re- 
search, as the relationship between a term - called 
the anaphor -  which must be linked to an explicit 
or inferable lement in the discourse - called the an- 
tecedent  - in order to successfully accomplish se- 
mantic interpretation. All types of anaphors are 
annotated, including pronouns, noun phrases, verb 
phrases, and all elliptical phenomena. 
A number of studies on anaphora ttempt o in- 
corporate the notion of topic, focus, or centre to the 
analysis of anaphora (see, among others, (Sial86), 
(Fox87)), leading to the discussion of ways to track 
topic - under any of the various names - in dis- 
course (among many others, (Rei85), (GS86) and 
(GJW95)) and to relate topicality to anaphor eso- 
lution. The research described here is no exception. 
In order to assess the importance of topicality for 
anaphor esolution, it was decided that topic struc- 
ture should be made an integral part of the investiga- 
tion, and, consequently, encoded in the annotation. 
The notion of topic is, however, notoriously diffi- 
cult to deal with (see (BY83) for an extensive discus- 
sion). A routine dialogue contains a number of dis- 
54 
course entities, typically expressed by noun phrases, 
which, to mention a few possibilities: may retain a 
salient status throughout he whole dialogue; may 
pop in and fade out any number of times; may pop 
in once and fade out for good; may pop in and subdi- 
vide into subordinate topics, then fade out and then 
return; and several other possible combinations and 
interactions. Moreover, real-life conversations often 
cannot be summed up in terms of a title-like global 
topic in any easy way. 
The study thus aimed at a working definition for 
the different levels of saliency so as to make the no- 
tion of topicality useful for the purpose of anaphor 
resolution. A set of categories was created to classify 
discourse ntities into top ica l  roles which cover the 
various levels of saliency. Global and local topics for 
a given dialogue had to be established a priori, in- 
dependently of the analysis of anaphoric relations, 
so as to avoid circularity, as pointed out in (Fox87), 
although subsequent adjustments may consider dis- 
course information related to those anaphoric rela- 
tions. 
Procedures to identify each one of the topical roles 
were spelled out as precisely as possible, having in 
mind that a measure of flexibility was necessary. The 
picture of topicality thus obtained oes not claim to 
be any more than part of the truth. However, the 
assignment of topical roles to discourse entities is 
claimed to be an effective way of supporting anaphor 
resolution by keeping track of salient discourse nti- 
ties. 
2 The  annotat ion  
The annotation is manually entered by the analyst 
in separate lines inserted in a machine-readable tran- 
script of a dialogue. Lines with one asterisk at the 
beginning contain information about the topicality 
structure. A one-asterisk line is inserted at the top 
of the transcript, defining which discourse ntity is 
to be considered the global topic - called the dis- 
course top ic  and represented by the code dt in 
the annotat ion-  for the dialogue. The procedure 
to select the discourse topic draws on the work in 
(Hoe91) and involves a number of steps based on 
frequency, distribution, position of first token, and 
semantic adequacy for the role. In case there is a 
radical and stable change of topic within the dia- 
logue, the dialogue is split into two fragments, each 
one with its own discourse topic. 
Each local topic - called a segment  top ic  and 
coded as st - is specified in one-asterisk lines in- 
serted at the beginning of the segment in question. 
New segments introduce new local topics. The pro- 
cedure to identify a new topic is based on the work 
on discourse analysis described in (Sin93) and in 
(Sin92), making use of concepts uch as prospection 
and encapsulation. Each new utterance is assessed 
on the basis of these coherence devices to determine 
whether it introduces a new topic or not. 
It is necessary further to divide the dialogue into 
subsegments with distinct subtopics, called subseg-  
ment  topics  and coded sst. These are subordinate 
local topics within a segment. Subsegment topics 
are also specified in one-asterisk lines by means of 
an ss mark that distinguishes them from segment 
topics (marked s). Therefore, the procedure used 
for segmentation must not only identify a new topic 
but also distinguish a local topic from a subordinate 
local topic. 
Segments and subsegments are sequentially num- 
bered as they appear in the dialogue. In case a pre- 
viously developed segment or subsegment topic be- 
comes the current topic again, the code r is placed 
before the segment or subsegment code to signal it is 
a resumptive segment or subsegment. Subsegment 
codes are followed by a slash which is in turn fol- 
lowed by the code for the segment which contains 
the subsegment (see example (1) below). 
The procedures used to assign topical roles to dis- 
course entities aim to be as objective as possible, so 
that different analysts hould come to the same con- 
clusions concerning topical roles in a given dialogue. 
The procedures constrain choices, but the analyst 
must use a measure of discretion to make final deci- 
sions. A full description of the procedures, as well as 
the complete listing of codes used in the annotation 
scheme, can be found in (Rocng). 
Once the topicality structure of the dialogue has 
been fully defined, each case of anaphora is anno- 
tated according to four properties. The first prop- 
erty is the type  of  anaphor .  The categories used 
combine: word classes, such as sub jec t  p ronoun 
(coded as SP  in example (1) below); phrase struc- 
ture concepts, such as noun phrase,  marked FNP 
in (1); and anaphora-world efinitions, like one-  
anaphora ,  which appears as One_an below. The 
code is entered in a line with two asterisks at the 
beginning, inserted under the anaphor classified. 
Notions like zero anaphor or zero pronoun are not 
included in the set of categories employed to classify 
types of anaphor. The word which triggers a search 
for an antecedent is annotated as an anaphor. A 
verb which appears without one or more of its essen- 
tial complements requires the identification of these 
complements from ongoing discourse and is conse- 
quently annotated as an anaphoric verb. This de- 
cision is particularly important for the annotation 
of the Portuguese data. The twenty-seven cate- 
55 
gories used in the analysis of the English sample 
were grouped into three umbrella categories. Fre- 
quencies for these umbrella categories are shown in 
Table 1 below: 
Table 1: Frequencies for types of anaphor 
Pronouns 
Verbs and adverbials 
Nominals 
Total 
Frequency Percent 
1579 51.1 
318 10.3 
1193 38.6 
3090 100.0 
The three remaining properties are entered in a line 
with three asterisks at the beginning inserted under 
the two-asterisk line with the code for the type of 
anaphor. A semicolon separates the code for each 
property. An example of annotated text is shown 
below: 
(1) 
B: well I think probably what Captain Kay 
** FNP 
*** ex_222; dthe l ;  LR; 
must have said was a will is legal if it's 
** SP 
*** ex_224; d the l ;  FtC; 
witnessed on the back of an envelope 
* ss4/s38 'Captain's personal witnessing' 
A: w- d id  he say that  
** SP 
*** ex_222;  the l ;  Ft0p; 
he had personal ly witnessed one 
** SP One_an 
*** ex_222; thel; FtCCh; ex_l; dr; SetMb; 
B: well I could have been 
I could have been wrong there 
** AdvP 
*** ex_ l l6 ;  p_ss t ;  CK; 
The first property to have the corresponding code 
inserted in the three-asterisk line is the type  of  an-  
tecedent .  The antecedent for the anaphor in ques- 
tion is classified according to the explicit/implicit 
dichotomy, using the marks ex and im followed by 
a number which identifies the referent in a list. How- 
ever, it is a policy of the study to annotate very to- 
ken of third-person personal pronoun, as well as all 
demonstrative pronouns, regardless of the fact that 
they may be nonreferential, and thus not a case of 
anaphora strictu sensu. A third category was cre- 
ated for the cases of nonreferential pronouns - typi- 
cally /l or lhat. Frequencies for the English sample 
are shown in Table 2 below: 
Table 2: Frequencies for types of antecedent 
Frequency Percent 
Explicit 2562 82.9 
Implicit 412 13.3 
Nonreferential 116 3.8 
Total 3090 100.0 
The second slot in the three-asterisk line contains 
code for the property called the top ica l i ty  s ta tus  
of  the  antecedent ,  which uses the topical roles de- 
fined for topic tracking to classify the antecedent of 
the anaphora case in question. An antecedent which 
is not one of the topics is a discourse entity associ- 
ated to one of the topics. If it is associated locally 
to the segment opic, it is classified as a themat ic  
e lement .  A thematic element may have a cross- 
segment saliency, in which case it is called a dis- 
course  themat ic  e lement .  The latter typically 
include the participants in the dialogue, other im- 
portant agents and also objects associated to the 
discourse topic. 
Antecedents can also be discourse chunks. They 
are classified as predicates of the entity with a topi- 
cal role to which they are most strongly related. The 
various categories used to assign a topicality status 
to antecedents were grouped as global (discourse) 
roles, local (segment) roles, or sublocal (subsegment) 
roles. A fourth category - namely, focus ing  dev ice  
- is used to classify the cases of anaphors with no an- 
tecedent (nonreferentials) or with antecedents which 
were too vaguely implicit for an accurate assessment 
in terms of topical role. Frequencies for the English 
sample are shown in Table 3 below: 
Table 3: Frequencies for topical roles 
Frequency Percent 
Local topical roles 1298 42.0 
Global topical roles 1068 34.6 
Sublocal topical roles 585 18.9 
Focusing devices 139 4.5 
Total 3090 100.0 
The fourth property is an attempt o encode psy- 
cholinguistic information for anaphor resolution. 
The observation of corpus data revealed that the 
classification into types of anaphor - first property 
- did not cover important processing information. 
Different strategies are needed to resolve the same 
type of anaphor - and often the same anaphoric word 
or phrase - in different contexts. Syntactic informa- 
tion - as codified in an algorithm like the "naive" 
algorithm in Hobbs' (Hob86) - may suffice to resolve 
a given occurrence of /t. However, another token 
of the same word may demand rather complex dis- 
course processing, bypassing a number of candidates 
to reach the correct antecedent. A large number of 
56 
categories were used to classify tokens according to 
process ing  s t ra tegy .  They were grouped as shown 
in Table 4 below with the respective frequencies for 
the English sample. 
Table 4: Frequencies for processin~ strategies 
Frequency Percent 
Lexical processes 1095 35.4 
Discourse processes 503 16.3 
Collocations 279 9.0 
Syntactic processes 1213 39.3 
Total 3090 100.0 
3 The probabilistic model 
The frequency counts yielded by the annotation 
work - shown in the previous section - were used 
to build a probabilistic tree which is a model of 
the anaphora world as described by the annotation 
scheme. The root of the tree is a category in the vari- 
able named type  o f  anaphor .  The choice bears in 
mind the possibility of automatic annotation. Given 
a POS-tagged ialogue, it should not be difficult to 
map the tags into the categories used to classify the 
type of anaphor. 
It was necessary then to decide which variable 
should occupy the next level in the tree. In or- 
der to make an informed choice, cross-tabulations 
for each possible combination of two variables were 
produced, together with a chi-square test and two 
non-chi-square-based association measures. Signifi- 
cance was achieved in all cases, but association was 
not very strong, except for the relation between type 
of anaphor and processing strategy (Goodman and 
Kruskal tau = 0.41). The Goodman and Kruskal 
tau is an association measure based on the notion 
of proportional reduction of error. The value thus 
means that, once the distribution for type of anaphor 
is known, the chances of predicting the processing 
strategy correctly are forty-one percent higher. 
Other factors pointed to the processing strategy 
variable as the best candidate for the second level of 
the probability tree. The other two variables clas- 
sify the antecedent. Thus, it is impossible to be 
sure of the correct category classification before ac- 
tually identifying the antecedent. This means that, 
although the type of antecedent can occasionaly be 
predicted on the basis of the anaphor type, it will not 
be possible to offer more than a probability for each 
category in most cases. On the other hand, the pro- 
cessing strategy can be safely predicted on the basis 
of the anaphor type in at least one case, namely, if 
the processing strategy relies on knowledge of col- 
locations. These collocations contain words such as 
it or that which function in a distinct way when ap- 
pearing in phrases such as that's it or I mean it. 
Collocations can be identified by simply checking a 
list which has been prepared as the annotation work 
progressed. 
The nodes on the second level of the tree are 
the categories which classify the processing strategy. 
Each branch of the tree is assigned two values. The 
first one is the probability for that particular branch 
within the universe of the node immediately above, 
while the second one is the probability for the whole 
branch all the way to the root, that is, in relation 
to the total sample. Thus, given that the anaphor 
is a pronoun, the probability that it will be resolved 
by means of lexical  p rocess ing  - meaning knowl- 
edge associated with the semantics of the anaphor - 
is 0.01267, which is rather small. In relation to any 
anaphor, the probability that it will be a pronoun 
resolved by means of lexical processing is 0.00647, 
which is extremely small. However, it is different 
from zero and must be taken into consideration. 
The subsequent level in the tree can be occu- 
pied by any of the two remaining variables. How- 
ever, it was decided that probabilities should be cal- 
culated for all possible combinations of categories 
across the variables. Once the frequency counts had 
been obtained, a program was written which calcu- 
lates probabilities for every combination in relation 
to the immediately higher node and for the total in 
all possible orderings of the variables. In spite of 
the fact that placing the processing strategy before 
the other two is elear\[); more economic, there may 
be one type of anaphor for which this is not true. 
All options are thus available for use in building the 
antecedent-likelihood theory. 
The probabilistie model is the mainstay of the the- 
ory, but the collocation list and other regularities 
observed also play an essential role. For instance, 
the few cases classified as pronouns resolved by lex- 
ical processing were looked into in search of a fea- 
ture that could be the clue for pronoun resolutions 
based on lexical processing. Probabilities for the un- 
grouped categories were also calculated and are a 
source of useful information as well. The next sec- 
tion describes how these various inputs are combined 
to support anaphora resolution. 
4 Building the theory 
Once the probabilities for every combination of cate- 
gories across the variables had been worked out, the 
task then was to put these numbers to good use. In 
the case where pronouns are the root of the proba- 
bility tree, the results for processing strategy are as 
shown in Table 5 below. 
57 
Table 5: Processing strategies for pronouns 
Frequency Probability 
Lexical processes 20 0.012 
Discourse processes 398 0.252 
Collocat ions 217 0.137 
Syntactic processes 944 0.597 
Total 1579 1.000 
If these results are compared to the percentages in
Table 4, some important differences emerge. There 
is a steep decline in the number of anaphors resolved 
by means of lexical processes. This is not surprising. 
Lexical processes are an umbrella category group- 
ing strategies uch as wor ld  knowledge  and lexi-  
cal repet i t ion .  These strategies are typical of res- 
olutions related to anaphoric nonpronominal noun 
phrases, as they rely on the semantic ontent of the 
anaphor itself to identify the correct antecedent. As 
pronouns characteristically have low semantic value, 
it is in fact surprising that any of them are resolved 
by such means at all. 
All other three categories how increases in re- 
lation to the percentages in Table 4, but syntactic 
processes present the highest increase. One of the 
strategies grouped under syntactic processes is the 
f i r s t -cand ldate  strategy, which may be described 
as an adaptation of Hobbs' "naive" algorithm (see 
(Hob86) to spoken language, since it searches for 
the first appropriate noun phrase in the ongoing dis- 
course and selects it as the antecedent on the basis 
of agreement and syntactic onstraints. 
The most frequent processing strategy within syn- 
tactic processes is the f i r s t -cand idate  chain.  This 
confirms Biber's (Bib92) findings about the impor- 
tance of chains in conversations, but it tones down 
optimistic expectations of easy anaphor esolution. 
Chains do not necessarily start with an anaphor e- 
solved by a first-candidate strategy, although many 
of them do. Consequently, the actual identification 
of the antecedent may still need to employ one of 
the less straightforward strategies. The two first- 
candidate strategies together account for almost all 
cases of syntactic processes in pronouns. 
The list of collocations collected during the anno- 
tation process shows that, within the pronoun cat- 
egory, the personal pronoun it and the demonstra- 
tives this and that are the only tokens which appear 
in collocations. There is no need to check the col- 
location list when the pronoun being resolved is not 
one of the above. Virtually all collocations entail a 
resolution for the anaphors they contain. Once iden- 
tified, the collocation can therefore be associated to 
a distinct way of handling the anaphor. 
Discourse processes are strategies that demand 
more complex information which cannot be obtained 
by checking a collocation list or analysing the seman- 
tic content of the anaphor. A first-candidate search 
will also fail in these cases, as the correct antecedent 
is not the first candidate available, either straight- 
forwardly or in a chain. The typical case is the pro- 
noun reference which bypasses the first candidate in 
spite of the fact that it is an appropriate one, if only 
agreement and syntax are considered. An example 
is given below: 
(2) 
B: I mean what difference could it make 
to the directors of Unilever that 
their shares had got down from say 
eighty to fifty or whatever it is 
A: well in the present circumstances 
not very much because I mean 
everything has gone down but of course 
if they are consistently low 
it makes them more diff icult 
it makes it more diff icult for them 
to raise money 
The second occurrence of them - the first one is part 
of a false start - is to a certain extent ambiguous, as 
the antecedent might be said to be either directors of 
Unilever or Unilever, although understanding is not 
much affected by choosing one or the other. What  
is important is that the antecedent is not shares and 
thus there is no chain of reference. The first can- 
didate they has to be bypassed, as well as present 
circumstances, in order to identify the correct an- 
tecedent. 
The phrase to raise money has to be semantically 
processed before the anaphor can be successfully re- 
solved. Information yielded by the syntactic struc- 
ture, lexical content of the anaphors, or knowledge 
of collocations will not achieve the correct identifi- 
cation of the antecedent. As the resolution involves 
knowledge only available after processing discourse 
in full, this strategy is named d iscourse  knowl -  
edge.  The use of lexical clues from the immediate 
context and the topical roles of candidates are of 
crucial importance for the correct resolution of this 
kind of anaphor. 
Other strategies grouped under discourse pro- 
cesses include: secondary  re ference ,  which is the 
use of first and second person pronouns in speech re- 
ported verbatim to refer to persons previously men- 
tioned in the dialogue; d i s tant  anaphora ,  which 
are pronouns with very distant antecedents - over 
fifty tone units - but without competing candidates; 
pronouns which conjoin referents in a set, called 
set c reat ion ;  reference to an element within a set, 
called set member ;  and the cases of antecedent- 
less anaphors (see (Cor96)), in which the processing 
58 
strategy is called deixis.  The categories grouped as 
discourse processes may be seen as the particularly 
complex strategies for anaphor esolution. 
The example above also contains four tokens of it. 
Three of them can be resolved by using a more so- 
phisticated version of collocational knowledge. The 
first one is in a make no difference collocation. The 
observation of corpus data shows that the it in such 
collocations has an explicit clausal or sentential an- 
tecedent in all cases found. It also reveals that the 
reference is cataphoric whenever "make" is the main 
verb in a sentence with a subordinate that-clause. 
Furthermore, this that-clause is the antecedent in all 
occurrences of the kind. 
The collocation list has thus an entry such as: 
it X -make d i f ference to Ob j  that -c lause  
? cataphoric it (Subj) 
? antecedent = that-clause 
This sort of knowledge is extended to cleft sen- 
tences, adding to the collocation list an entry like: 
it X -be  Sub jC  that -c lause  
? cataphoric it (Subj) 
? antecedent = that-clause 
In order to resolve the second and third tokens of 
it, the entry to be accessed in the collocation list is: 
it X -VERB Ob j l  Ad j  for Ob j2  NF-c lause  
? cataphoric it (Subj) 
? antecedent = NF-clause 
? if VERB = make and Obj l  = it 
- it (Obj l)  nonreferential 
The X- symbol means any inflected form of the 
verb, optionally including tense, aspect and modal- 
ity. The major structures of the language, such as af- 
firmative, interrogative and negative forms, are also 
assumed as included in the entry. The other sym- 
bols in the entries above stand for subject (Subj), 
subject complement (SubjC)object (Obj), adjective 
(Adj) and nonfinite ( i F ) .  
The entries in the collocation list are related to 
specific pronouns. As mentioned before, it is the 
only personal pronoun to appear in collocations with 
a pattern of regular resolution. It is reasonable to 
think, thus, that other patterns may emerge if the 
categories in the anotation scheme are individually 
analysed out of the umbrella categories. Although 
the grouping was very useful for the significance 
and association tests, the antecedent-likelihood (AL) 
theory requires a return to the original categories, as 
well as the analysis of individual pronouns. 
Suppose then that a dialogue tagged using the 
tagset in (Sam95) is being analysed according to the 
AL theory in order to resolve anaphors. A word 
tagged as PPH1 is a token of it. Suppose further- 
more that this token of it has been identified as an 
object pronoun by means which need not be dis- 
cussed here. The header for the word in the AL 
theory is: 
? syntactic process = 0.729 
? discourse process = 0.151 
? collocation = 0.080 
? lexical process = 0.013 
If these numbers are compared to the numbers for 
pronouns as a whole, there is a substantial increase 
in the number of anaphors resolved by syntactic pro- 
cesses. The probabilities for resolutions which rely 
on knowledge of collocations and on discourse pro- 
cesses decrease, whereas the probability for lexical 
processes remains equally low. The reduction in 
collocation-related strategies can be explained. The 
number of collocations in which it is an object pro- 
noun is much smaller. Moreover, cleft sentences are 
the most common collocation, and it is a subject 
pronoun in these sentences. The decrease in resolu- 
tions by means of discourse processes is caused by 
the fact that demonstratives have been taken out. 
The next step is to match the tone unit in which 
the token occurs with the entries in the collocation 
list. If there is a match, the path to resolution is 
spelled out in the entry. If there isn't, the next step 
is to eliminate rare processing strategies which are 
only needed in special cases. One way to do that 
is to use the strategy with the highest probability 
to select a tentative antecedent and check the an- 
tecedent against information in the theory. If no 
appropriate referents are found, not even one which 
fits poorly, it must be one of the special situations. 
In the case of it, the two first-candidate strategies 
are by far the most probable and rarely fail to pro- 
duce an antecedent. Understandably, all cases in the 
sample in which both did fail are tokens at the very 
beginning of the dialogues in question. 
The only possibility then is that the anaphor is 
one of the rare cases of resolution by means of lex- 
ical processes. Shared knowledge allows the partic- 
ipants to identify an antecedent that has not been 
mentioned because in the situation where the con- 
versation occurs, it can only mean one thing. It is 
59 
a rare but interesting case for dialogue systems in 
which the same user is expected to have more than 
one session. The history of communications between 
man and machine would have to be available in or- 
der to allow resolution, as it is the anaphor that 
introduces the discourse ntity in the dialogue. 
In all cases in the sample, participants only intro- 
duce discourse entities in this way when they are 
central to the conversation yet to take place and 
thus have highly salient global topical roles. The 
antecedent is obviously implicit. The AL theory for 
it as an object pronoun specifies then: 
check co l locat ion  l ist 
? if no match found 
select  f i rst  appropr ia te  candidate 
? if no appropriate candidate found 
? beginning of dialogue ?
? if not no record 
? if yes lexical process; shared knowledge 
? discourse topic or discourse thematic element in 
all cases 
? implicit in all cases 
Resolutions which require discourse processes are 
the most difficult to identify, particularly those cases 
in which the first candidate is not the correct an- 
tecedent and must be bypassed for a different one, 
as in example (2) above. However, antecedents re- 
quiring this sort of processing strategy for identifica- 
tion are usually highly salient elements. Moreover, 
a lexical clue of some kind is often present in the 
context. 
In the case of both object and subject pronouns, 
the verb to which they are attached is of great im- 
portance. The provisional antecedent may be ruled 
out by selectional restrictions. It seems also impor- 
tant to have a record of verbs associated to discourse 
entities, as they are likely to be referred to as argu- 
ments of the same verb or of a similar one. Related 
adjectives and noun phrases attached to the same 
verb should also be examined. If the provisional an- 
tecedent has never appeared as an argument of the 
verb to which the anaphor is attached, the possibil- 
ity of bypassing it should be considered. If bypass- 
ing it selects a highly salient entity, such as the dis- 
course topic or a high-frequency discourse thematic 
element, and this entity has appeared as an argu- 
ment of the verb in question, the resolution by dis- 
ocurse knowledge is probably the best choice. Thus, 
the AL theory for it as an object pronoun proceeds 
as below: 
? if an appropriate candidate found 
check se lect iona l  res t r i c t ions  of  verb  
check h is tory  o f  verb  in d ia logue  
check assoc ia ted  ad jec t ives  and  noun phrases  
? if the antecedent fits, accept it 
? if the antecedent doesn't fit 
se lect  next  cand idate  
repeat  checks  
* if the antecedent fits 
check topical  ro le  
? if dt, dthel or st 
bypass  prev ious  candidate 
The AL theory is still being finalised. When com- 
pleted, it will contain systematised records like those 
above for all types of anaphor. It will be then tested 
on a previously annotated dialogue which has not 
been included in the training sample. Results will be 
evaluated according to two standards: the percent- 
age of correct antecedents identified by the single 
or highest-probability choice selected by the theory 
when applied to a case; and the percentage of cor- 
rect antecedents identified when lower-probability 
choices are also considered. The test will assess the 
efficacy of the theory and will also expose overlooked 
shortcomings. 
5 Future  deve lopments  
This paper presents results for the English sample 
only. The same set of categories is used for the an- 
notation of dialogues in Portuguese. However, some 
types of anaphor only have tokens for one of the 
languages. For instance, the type of anaphor one- 
anaphora does not occur in Portuguese. One of the 
interesting developments to be explored, once the 
analysis of both samples is completed, is the con- 
trastive analysis of results. A database of aligned 
discourse environments related to anaphoric phe- 
nomena-  covering linguistic information at all levels 
- could be produced, providing guidance for appli- 
cations such as machine translation and computer- 
aided language learning. If automatic annotation 
can be at least partially accomplished, the scheme 
60 
may prove its worth in practical applications, in- 
cluding those which involve only one of the two lan- 
guages, such as dialogue systems. 
Automatic annotation using this scheme is a 
daunting task, particularly because of the need to 
identify the discourse ntities selected for the topi- 
cal roles, as procedures ultimately require a decision 
by the analyst. Other problems not discussed in this 
paper, such as the identification of discourse-chunk 
antecedents for the resolution of demonstrative pro- 
nouns, are also very difficult. Nonetheless, the ap- 
proach seems worth pursuing precisely because the 
hardest cases are not left out. The inclusion of vari- 
ables for topical roles and processing strategy repre- 
sents an attempt o deal with difficulties which have 
been often avoided in studies on anaphora. 
6 Acknowledgment  
The project is fully funded by the Conselho Nacional 
de Desenvolvimento Cient~fico e TecnolSgico under 
grant no. 200608-92/4. 
Re ferences  
Douglas Biber. Using computer-based text corpora 
to analyse the referential strategies of spoken and 
written texts. In Jan Svartvik, editor, Directions 
in corpus linguistics, pages 215-252, Berlin and 
New York, 4-8 August 1991 1992. Nobel Sympo- 
sium 82, Mouton de Gruyter. 
Gillian Brown and George Yule. Discourse analysis. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983. 
Francis Cornish. Antecedentless anaphors: deixis, 
anaphora, or what? Some evidence from English 
and French. Journal of Linguistics, 32:19-41, 
1996. 
Steve Fligelstone. Developing a scheme for anno- 
tating text to show anaphoric relations. In New 
directions in English language corpora: method- 
ology, results, software development, number 9 
in Topics in English Linguistics, pages 153-170. 
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1992. 
Barbara Fox. Discourse structure and anaphora. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
Barbara Grosz, Aravind Joshi, and Scott Weinstein. 
Centering: a framework for modeling the local co- 
herence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
21(2):203-225, 1995. 
Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. Attentions, in- 
tentions and the structure of discourse. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 12(3):175-204, July-September 
1986. 
Jerry Hobbs. Resolving pronoun references. In B.L. 
Webber, Barbara Grosz, and K. Jones, editors, 
Readings in Natural Language Processing. Morgan 
Kaufmann, Palo Alto, CA., 1986. 
Michael Hoey. Patterns of lezis in text. Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, Oxford, 1991. 
Rachel Reichman. Getting computers to talk like you 
and me. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1985. 
Marco Rocha. A description of an annotation 
scheme to analyse anaphora in dialogues. Tech- 
nical Report 427, University of Sussex - School 
of Cognitive and Computing Sciences, Brighton, 
1997 (forthcoming). 
Geoffrey Sampson. English for the computer. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995. 
Candace Sidner. Focusing in the comprehension of
definite anaphora. In Karen Jones Barbara Grosz 
and Bonnie Webber, editors, Readings in natural 
language processing. Morgan Kaufman, Palo Alto, 
CA, 1986. 
John Sinclair. Priorities in discourse analysis. In 
R. Coulthard, editor, Advances in Spoken Dis- 
course Analysis. Routledge, London, 1992. 
John Sinclair. Written discourse structure. In 
J. Sinclair, M. Hoey, and G. Fox, editors, Tech- 
niques of description: spoken and written dis- 
course: a festschrift or Malcolm Coulthard. Rout- 
ledge, London, 1993. 
61 
