Towards Reliable Partial Anaphora Reso lut ion 
Sab ine  Berg le r  * 
Computer Science Department, Concordia University 
1455 de Maisonneuve Blvd. W., Montrgal, Qugbec, H3G 1M8 
bergler@cs, concordia, ca 
Abst ract  
This paper assumes that currently, anaphora resolution 
at a desired level of reliability has to remain partial. It 
presents the thesis that multiple small ("expert") proce- 
dures of known reliability that are conceived for partial 
analysis have to be developed and combined in order 
to increase coverage. These resolution experts will be 
specific to style, domain, task, etc. The paper describes 
corpus analysis that suggests uch experts and their po- 
tential ordering. A quick and partial implementation f 
the ideas is evaluated on Wall Street Journal articles. 
In t roduct ion  
Totally correct anaphora resolution requires full nat- 
ural language understanding, since anaphoric relations 
could be hidden in the context. At present, only partial 
natural anguage understanding is possible. This paper 
claims that one way to increase the reliability (or at 
least in assessing the reliability) of anaphora resolution 
lies in acknowledging and making use of this limitation. 
Strategies of anaphora resolution depend on the genre 
and style of text under consideration, as the different 
style manuals for major newspapers show. Since many 
practical applications are limited to a certain genre, it is 
legitimate to optimize results by studying peculiarities 
of the genre. 
We focus our attention on the Wall Street Journal 
corpus available on CD-ROM from the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Our main interest at the 
outset was in assessing the lexical complexity of NP 
coreference to guide us in our development of a lexi- 
con. We reported initial corpus analysis results that 
show the relative frequency of semantic relations that 
hold between elements in eoreference chains \[Bergler 
and Knoll, 1996\]. Analyzing the reference chains 1 of 
*This work is funded in part by the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada and Fonds pour la 
formation de chercheurs et l'aide k la recherche. 
1 Reference chains in this study contain all (partial) noun 
phrases that corefer in a text. They are thus different from 
\[Morris and Hirst, 1991\], who do not limit their reference 
chains to NPs. 62 
79 articles (28,798 words) from the Wall Street Jour- 
nal we found that 35% of the subsequent references are 
actually equal to the first reference of that entity, 23% 
are close variations of the first reference (i.e. retain at 
least the same headword). Pronouns and appositions 
account for 22% and systematic lexical relation (syn- 
onymy and hyponymy) for 7%. We consider the re- 
maining 13% to be tough cases that might require full 
syntactic, lexical, and semantic processing. The other 
87% we expect can be addressed with a subset of these 
tools. 
This paper presents further results of this corpus 
analysis which lead to some resolution strategies and 
presents an experiment in implementing some of these 
aspects in a knowledge poor system. 
Corpus  Ana lys i s  Resu l ts  
The corpus study of 79 articles from the Wall Street 
Journal was performed manually by a single analyst, 
thus the results are as consistent as possible for a man- 
ual analysis. The analyst separated all NPs from the 
text, when appropriate separating referring sub-NPs 
from larger NPs, and for each NP placed it in a chain 
that contained a coreferent when possible or started a 
new chain. Chains were additionally annotated for a 
few features of interest, such as length of the article 
(short or long), the textual designator (see below), and 
whether the chain was part of the topic of the article 
(see next Section.) These annotations were ultimately 
left to the judgement of the analyst within a strict set 
of rules. 
Particularly encouraging are the first two lines in Fig- 
ure 1. It turns out that over a third of the coreferring 
NPs are identical and can therefore be recovered reli- 
ably and correctly without linguistic tools. Almost a 
quarter of the coreferring NPs are very close to the first 
NP in the reference chain, that is they share at least the 
headword, if not a larger substring with the first refer- 
ence. Thus in theory almost 60% of coreferring NPs 
should be identifiable with very simple techniques once 
the NPs have been identified. 
To put things into perspective, let us reconsider the 
numbers in Figure 1 with some additional information. 
Semantic relation Total 
Equal to first reference 1424 
Close to first reference 955 
Appositions 128 
Pronouns 756 
Acronyms 46 
Synonyms 73 
Hypernyms 174 
Neither of the above 520 
Total NPs 4076 
Percent 
35% 
23~o 
3% 
19% 
1% 
2% 
4% 
13% 
100% 
Figure 1: Semantic relations between elements in coref- 
erence chains 
The 4076 NPs analyzed there constitute roughly half 
of the NPs counted in total in that collection of texts, 
namely 8,027. The 3,951 NPs that are not analyzed in 
Figure 1 are NPs that do not corefer with any other 
NP in the text. These singular occurrences account for 
49% of all NPs. One obvious question is: can singular 
occurrences of entities be singled out? This is an open 
question. We address the easier problem of: how can 
we determine NPs which are likely to corefer and which 
are most important o the text overall? 
Top ica l i ty  
The same study showed that NP chains considered to be 
in the topic of an article usually require anaphora reso- 
lution and are lexically more complex than non-topical 
reference chains. For this study we defined a topic to 
be one of the NPs that occur in the headline or the first 
sentence 2 (see \[Lundquist, 1989\] for a motivation of this 
heuristic.) A text can have no more than 4 topics (this 
number was chosen intuitively.) The analyst decided 
how many topics there were in each article according 
to her understanding of it. The text in Figure 3 was 
assigned a single topical chain containing NPs 1, 2.1, 
10, and 11. There are 185 topical chains in 79 articles, 
averaging 2.4 topics per article. 17% of the topical ref- 
erence chains are singular occurrences, i.e. NPs that 
do not corefer. 3 That  establishes that the topic of an 
article is usually referred to more than once. Intuitively 
we assume that the topic of an artice is more important 
to resolve than non-topical NPs. One partial strategy, 
consequently, is to establish potentially topical NPs in 
the first n sentences of a newspaper article and to re- 
solve coreference only to these NPs. This strategy has 
the advantage of reducing the search space considerably 
and of focusing on important (topical) chains. 
2The heuristic to find potential topics of an article is easy 
to implement: consider all NPs in the headline and the first 
sentence. 
3There are two possible explanations why this number 
is relatively high: the Wall Street Journal contains everal 
very short segments of very few sentences, thus a topic that 
is mentioned only once is a possibility. Also, headlines often 
use a summarizing term that never corefers with another 
NP, but rather corefers with the article as a whole. 
63 
Textua l  Des ignators  
We feel that NP resolution in newspaper articles is 
straightforward (by design) for human readers because 
of recurrent terms that designate an entity. To as- 
sess this intuition quantitatively, \[Bergler and Knoll, 
1996\] report the sum of distinct words within a chain 
over all non-singular chains. This count eliminates the 
recurrent words, whether empty (the) or descriptive 
(company). 4 The results show the significance of this 
phenomenon which we call textual designator. A tex- 
tual designator in this study is the first non-pronominal 
reference to an entity. Consider the text in Figure 3. 
One chain consists of two identical NPs, its Houston 
work force (NPs 3 and 15.) Other textual designators 
of that text are NP1, NP6, and NP16. Counting the 
number of different words in each chain allows us to as- 
sess the lexical diversity within a chain and the contri- 
bution of the textual designator to that diversity. The 
results are summarized in Figure 2. 
Chain Total 
type chains 
Topic 1,632 
Not topic 19,449 
Non-singular 
chains 
1,544 
5,672 
Excluding 
designator 
981 
2,808 
Figure 2: Number of different words per reference chain. 
We find 1,632 different words in topical chains and 
19,449 different words in non-topical chains. When we 
consider only the chains that actually involve coref- 
erence, the sums reduce to 1,544 different words for 
topical chains and 5,672 different words for non-topical 
chains. Removing the words that are part of the textual 
designator, we observe a drastic reduction to 981 differ- 
ent words for topical chains and 2,808 different words 
for non-topical chains. 
The 185 topical chains average about 9 different 
words per chain while non-topical chains average 4. 
Removing the words of the textual designator reduces 
the different word count by 40% for topical and 86% 
for non-topical chains when counting all chains. If we 
count only chains that involve coreference the reduc- 
tions are 36% for topical chains and 50% for non-topical 
chains. The number of different words excluding the 
words of the textual designator on average are 5 for 
topical chains and .6 for non-topical chains. 5
These numbers suggest that the textual designator 
defined as the first reference to an entity leads to a 
strong resolution heuristic, one that is in fact stronger 
for non-topical chains. The numbers also show how 
surprisingly small the lexical diversity of words outside 
4Note that the same word could potentially be counted 
in every single chain, as the recurrence is only eliminated 
within a chain. 
5This average includes singular chains. 
a textual designator are. The sum for both types of 
chains is 3,789. The textual designators are made up 
of 563 different words for topical non-singular chains 
and 2864 different words for non-topical, non-singular 
chains. The total number of different words for singular 
chains is 13,865. Thus the sum total of different words 
for first references i 17,292, a surprisingly high num- 
ber considering that the overall corpus has only 28,798 
words, which includes all duplicates. 
Resolution Strategies 
While we are still mining the results of our study for 
more data, some strategies for resolution in general are 
already emerging. 
We believe that there is strong evidence for an ap- 
proach to anaphora resolution in multiple passes, where 
earlier passes implement more reliable 6, less knowledge- 
intensive, and computationally less complex strategies 
with faster tools than later ones. For each pass, an 
expected reliability should ideally be known. 
The expectation is that early, knowledge-poor, and 
highly reliable passes can be used for almost any task. 
Matching equal NPs, for instance, can be done with 
basic, fast tools independently of further linguistic pro- 
cessing. Anaphora resolution could then be tailored to 
particular needs by determining which levels of reliabil- 
ity are acceptable to the task and using the passes 7 up 
to that threshold. For the remaining resolution task, a 
domain- and genre-specific set of procedures has to be 
developed. 
We argue that such a multi-pass approach as advan- 
tages to a monolithic approach, be it statistical or sym- 
bolic. While most symbolic anaphora resolution sys- 
tems probably correctly identify identical NPs as core- 
letting, making this a first step and using very fast, low 
level tools can pre-process a text faster. The modular 
approach allows for use of the tools of choice at each 
level. Moreover, a text can be left partly resolved, po- 
tentially allowing anaphora resolution to be interleaved 
with other linguistic processing as required. 
Another interesting result of our study is the fact 
that many NPs correctly resolve to more than one 
coreferring NP, and often resolve to the first reference. 
This provides upport for the viability of partial pars- 
ing methods, because a missing link does not mean the 
rest of the chain is unresolvable. As mentioned above, 
this also allows for a focused partial resolution strategy 
that attempts to resolve subsequent NPs only to a set 
of NPs determined at the outset (e.g., topical NPs, pre- 
determined subjects or persons, . . .  ). This provides the 
basis for a series of principled heuristics. These partial 
resolution strategies are of great importance where the 
amount of text to be processed is large but the depth 
6 Refiability here is with respect o errors of commission. 
7An appropriate subset of the following heuristics can of 
course be combined into a single pass, which is the case in 
our experimental system presented below. 
64 
of processing is shallow, as for certain text annotation 
tasks. 
The study presented above suggests the following 
strategies: 
1. Ident ica l  NPs  
Prerequisites: NP boundaries 
Procedure: string matching 
2. Focused  par t ia l  reso lu t ion  
Prerequisites: NP boundaries, identification proce- 
dures of the NP chains of interest 
Procedure: according to desired resolution strategies 
3. Common head 
Prerequisites: parsed NPs 
Procedure: matching head positions 
4. Appos i t ions  
Prerequisites: parsed NPs 
Procedure: matching syntactic pattern of apposition 
5. Extended head match ing  
Prerequisites: parsed NPs, lexicon or thesaurus 
Procedure: compare heads for synonymy, hypernomy 
6. P ronoun reso lu t ion  
Prerequisites: parsed text 
Procedure: as described in the literature 
These resolution strategies are not exhaustive, nor 
can an optimal ordering be assigned in general; the de- 
sired level of reliability, the genre and style features, and 
any possible additional linguistic processing will deter- 
mine different combinations, extensions, and orderings. 
Knowledge Poor  Reso lu t ion  
We implemented an experimental resolution system 
(ERS) based on these ideas. The system uses as input 
the parse trees provided by the Penn Treebank on the 
ACL CD-ROM. These parse trees have been corrected 
manually for inconsistencies. 
The system includes a (partial) implementation f all 
of the six strategies except for Focused Partial Resolu- 
tion. The most carefully worked out strategy is pronoun 
resolution. Pronoun resolution makes use of the parse 
trees and follows the ideas in \[Lappin and Leass, 1994, 
Hobbs, 1978\]. The other strategies have only been 
partially or crudely implemented. The Common Head 
strategy, for instance, uses a crude heuristic to deter- 
mine the head of a complex noun phrase that fails in 
certain cases. Extended Head Matching is limited to 
very few lexical items such as company, which receive 
special treatment. No lexicon is used, the required lex- 
ical knowledge has been provided in a list of gendered 
items. An additional limitation is the fact that the sys- 
tem considers coreference only within a sentence and 
between adjacent sentences. 
A lgor i thm 
For every NP in the text: 
(1 Telxon Corp. a) said (2 (2.1<<ref=l its 2.a) vice president for 
manufacturing 2) resigned and (3 (3.,<re/=1 its 3.1) Houston 
work force 3) has been trimmed by (4 40 people 4), or about 
(5<tel=4 15% 5) ? 
(6<rey=a The maker of hand-held computers and computer 
systems 6) said (7 the personnel changes r) were needed to 
improve (s the efficiency s) of (9 (9.a<rey=s its 9.1) manufac- 
turing operation 9). 
(lO<<ref=l The company 10) said (ll<<re/=lo it aa) hasn't 
named (12 a successor 12) to (a3>re$=a4 Ronald Burton 13), 
04<re\]=2 the vice president a4) who resigned. (15<re/=3 
(15.1<ref=l Its 15.1) Houston work force as) now totals (as 
230 as). 
Figure 3: Manually determined coreference in a short 
text from the Wall Street Journal 
1. Determine candidate referents within the sentence. 
If none are found (i.e. lack of agreement), determine 
candidate referents in previous entence. 
2. Test each candidate referent for actual coreference 
using: 
(a) Common Head (with slight modifications) 
(b) Extended Head Matching (limited to few cases) 
(c) Appositions 
(d) Copula 
3. If there is more than one possible coreference, select 
best. 
4. Merge the new coreference pair with existing refer- 
ence chains or start a new chain. 
Sample  Output  
This algorithms is clearly too constrained to ever 
achieve full resolution, but except for the pronoun res- 
olution, it was quickly implemented and performs ur- 
prisingly well. 
Both strengths and limitations are best illustrated on 
a short example. Consider the text in Figure 3, which 
has been annotated with manually determined corefer- 
ence links following the Lancaster notation \[Fligelstone, 
1992\] with slight modifications 
The annotation (2.1<re/=1 means that NP2.1 (a sub- 
NP of NP2) starts at this point and that it refers back- 
wards to NP1. The << sign indicates that this reference 
has also been detected by ERS. 
ERS determined 4 reference chains in this article. 
The first chain consists of NPs 1, 2.1, 10, and 11. The 
second chain contains NPs 6 and 9.1, the third contains 
NPs 3 and 15, and chain number four contains NPs 
16 and 15.1. The coreference link stipulated for chain 
four is wrong (an artifact of a strong bias towards in- 
trasentential resolution.) All other stipulated corefer- 
ence links are correct. There are six coreferring NPs 
whose coreference link has not been identified. Two of 
the stipulated chains could be merged (chains one and 
two.) 
65 
Pre l iminary  Resu l ts  
We evaluated ERS on a set of twelve short articles from 
the Wall Street Journal which had also been part of the 
corpus study described above. The chains of the study 
were compared to the chains stipulated by ERS and 
both were examined for correctness by a person not 
involved in the development of either. 
Text Sent. NPs 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
VII 
VIII 
IX 
X 
XI 
XII 
11 61 
4 20 
14 85 
8 53 
4 14 
3 15 
3 17 
2 13 
3 16 
7 30 
7 38 
10 49 
Wrong Omit ted  
4 7% 13 21% 
1 5% 6 30% 
2 2% 20 24% 
1 2% 17 32% 
0 0% 2 14% 
0 0% 1 7% 
1 6% 4 24% 
0 0% 3 23% 
1 6% 3 19% 
0 0% 5 17% 
16 42% 13 34% 
20 41% 18 37% 
76 411 \[ 46 \[ 11% 105 \[ 26% 
Figure 4: Evaluation of NP coreference 
Figure 4 shows the length of the articles in number 
of sentences, the number of NPs per article, the num- 
ber of NPs that have been placed in the wrong chain 
(wrong)  and the number of coreference links that have 
not been identified (omi t ted . )  ERS showed an error 
rate of 11% (wrongly dereferenced NPs) and an omis- 
sion rate of 26%. Interestingly, the error rates for in- 
dividual articles fluctuates between 0% and 7% for all 
but two articles. The two articles with over 40% error 
rate are both very typical Wall Street Journal articles 
that cover earnings of a particular company. The arti- 
cles are very similar and the high error rate is due to 
the same shortcoming of ERS: it has no special treat- 
ment for amount terms and currency terms and thus 
creates chains that contain all NPs with headword yen 
or million (in these articles about Japanese companies 
18.32 billion yen are also expressed as $128.9 million.) 
Since none of these NPs should corefer, the error rate is 
extremely high but could be fixed with shallow lexical 
knowledge. 
Before analyzing the performance of the heuristics in 
the evaluation, consider the results for reference chains. 
The twelve articles have 81 (non-singular) reference 
chains, ERS stipulates 50. 35 of the 81 chains have not 
been established by ERS (43%), while 17 (21%) contain 
NPs that do not corefer with any member of the chain. 
14 chains (17%) were correct (agreement between study, 
ERS, and verification), another 19 chains were correct 
but incomplete (24%). Thus 33 chains were established 
correctly and contained no errors, this amounts to a 
41% accuracy rate for chains. This figure is extremely 
low compared to the NP coreference resolution result 
because in the case of an incorrect coreference link in 
T 
e 
x 
t 
I 
II 
III 
iv 
V 
VI 
VII 
VIII 
IX 
X 
XI 
XII 
E 
10 
4 
18 
10 
1 
1 
4 
2 
4 
4 
10 
13 
7 3 1 3 
4 2 i"' 1 
10 4 4 2 
6 1 4 1 
0 0 0 0 
1 0 1 0 
1 0 0 1 
1 0 1 0 
3 1 1 1 
4 1 3 0 
6 0 2' 4 
7 2 4 
81 50 14 19 17 
O 
m 
1 
t 
t 
e 
d 
3 
2 
8 
5 
1 
0 
3 
1 
1 
1 
4 
6 
35 
Figure 5: Evaluation of reference chains 
a chain the entire chain is discounted. Correct chains 
are those were ERS picked up all the NPs that the an- 
alysts determined as belonging to that chain. Partly 
correct chains are those were every coreference link is 
correct but some are missing. Wrong chains are those 
that include an incorrect coreference link and omitted 
chains are those that the analysts determined to exist 
but which have no counterpart in ERS's output, s 
Causes  o f  E r rors  
An important first observation is that the human an- 
alysts did not agree in all cases, which reminds us to 
take figures and percentages with a grain of salt. Dis- 
agreements between the analysts are of course few. The 
majority of ERS's errors stem from three sources: lack 
of a lexicon, lack of syntactic finesse, and simplistic head 
matching for the Common Head heuristic. 
The lack of any lexicon tricks ERS into matching all 
amounts measured in yen as possessing the same head 
and thus coreferring. A lexicon could also avoid pro- 
noun agreement mistakes to a larger extent. 
ERS lacks syntactic finesse even though it uses the 
rather sophisticated Penn Treebank parse trees, be- 
cause its extraction of the head is based on heuristics 
rather than syntactic knowledge. 
Most mistakes, by far, are due to matching identi- 
cal heads where the modifying information in the NP 
makes it clear that no coreference exists, such as an is- 
s Note that the columns for correct, partly correct, wrong, 
and omitted chains do not add up to the number of real 
chains. This is due to several factors. Take for instance 
Text II, given in Figure 3, where two partly correct chains 
should have been merged and ERS's incorrect chain does 
not correspond to any real chain, thus there is an overcount 
of two chains. For the entire test set there is an overcount 
of 4 chains from three articles. 
sue price of $849 . . .  and a conversion price of $25 . . . .  
These, as well as omissions, would be re~ced by con- 
sidering the compositional semantics of the NPs. Omis- 
sions would also be reduced by implementing the res- 
olution strategies fully (acronyms, hyponymic relations 
of head nouns, etc.) 
Conclusion 
This paper reviews results from previous corpus analy- 
sis and presents new data that show that simple resolu- 
tion procedures based on lexical similarity can achieve 
partial anaphora resolution. We advocate a multi- 
pass approach, sequencing appropriate simple resolu- 
tion strategies for any given application. These passes 
can be interleaved with other linguistic processing and 
thus afford more flexibility than a monolithic anaphora 
resolution strategy. 
We have tested these ideas with a crude experimental 
system that had an error rate of 11% and an omission 
rate of 26%. This result confirms the estimate from our 
corpus analysis and error analysis indicates refinements 
required for a robust system. 
Acknowledgements 
The manual corpus analysis was done by Sonja Knoll. 
ERS has been implemented by Dr. Xiaobin Li. Jennifer 
Scott did the evaluation. Thanks also to the anonymous 
reviewers, whose comments helped to improve the pa- 
per. 
References 
\[Bergler and Knoll, 1996\] S. Bergler and S. Knoll. Coref- 
erence patterns in the wall street journal. In C. Percy, 
C.F. Meyer, and I. Lancashire, editors, Synchronic orpus 
linguistics. Papers from the sixteenth International Con- 
ference on English Language Research on Computerized 
Corpora (1CAME 16). Rodopi, Amsterdam, 1996. 
\[Fligelstone, 1992\] S. Fligelstone. Developing a scheme for 
annotating text to show anaphoric relations. In G. Leit- 
net, editor, New Directions in English Language Corpora. 
Mouton deGruyter, Berlin, 1992. 
\[Hobbs, 1978\] .I.R. Hobbs. Resolving pronoun references. 
Lingua, 44:311-338, 1978. 
\[Lappin and Leass, 1994\] S. Lappin and H.J. Leass. An al- 
gorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 20(4):535-561, 994. 
\[Lundquist, 1989\] L. Lundquist. Modality and text consti- 
tution. In M-E. Conte, J.S. PetSfi, and E. SSzer, editors, 
Text and Discourse Connectedness. Proceedings of the 
Conference on Connexity and Coherence, Urbino, July 
1984. John Benjamins Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1989. 
\[Morris and Hirst, 1991\] J. Morris and G. Hirst. Lexical 
cohesion computed by thesaural relations as an indica- 
tor of the structure of text. Computational Linguistics, 
17(1):21-48, 1991. 
66 
