A Complexity Measure for Diachronic Chinese Phonology 
Anand Raman 
Computer Science 
Massey University 
Palmerston North 
New Zealand 
A. Raman@massey .  ac .  nz  
John Newman 
Linguistics and SLT 
Massey University 
Palmerston North 
New Zealand 
J. Newman@massey. ac. nz 
Jon Patr ick 
Information Systems 
Massey University 
Palmerston North 
New Zealand 
J .  D. Pat r i ck@mas sey .  ac .  nz  
Abst ract  
This paper addresses the problem of de- 
riving distance measures between parent 
and daughter languages with specific rele- 
vance to historical Chinese phonology. The 
diachronic relationship between the lan- 
guages is modelled as a Probabilistic Fi- 
nite State Automaton. The Minimum Mes- 
sage Length principle is then employed to 
find the complexity of this structure. The 
idea is that this measure is representative 
of the amount of dissimilarity between the 
two languages. 
1 In t roduct ion  
When drawing up genetic trees of languages, it is 
sometimes useful to quantify the degree of relation- 
ship between them. Mathematical approaches along 
these lines have been pursued for some time now - -  
Embleton (1991') is an excellent review of some im- 
portant techniques. Cheng (1982), in fact, attempts 
to address the issue central to this paper - -  that 
of obtaining distance measures between related Chi- 
nese dialects. However, he does this at a lexical level 
by using Karl Pearson's tetrachoric orrelation coef- 
ficient on 905 words from a lexical dictionary (Cihui, 
1964). This paper takes a novel approach to this 
problem by pioneering the use of phonological data 
to find dissimilarity measures, as opposed to lexical 
(which has bee n used most frequently up till now), 
semantic or syntactic data. 1 
1Indeed, semantic similarity, which is usually neces- 
sary for the ident;ification of cognates in Indo-European 
languages, is not even relevant in the case of the Chinese 
languages we are concerned with in this paper because 
cognates can be visually identified in Chinese languages 
due to a common ideographic writing system stretching 
back over 3 millenia (Streeter, 1977, p.103). 
An argument can also be made that phonetic 
or phonological dissimilarity measures, being the 
least abstract of all, could give the most realis- 
tic results. Unfortunately, studies in this direction 
have been relatively rare. Two such works which 
should be mentioned are Grimes and Agard (1959) 
and Hsieh (1973), both of which are, however, con- 
strained by the use of lexicostatistical methodology. 
In fairness to existing methods, it must be noted that 
many other existing methods for obtaining dissimi- 
larity measures are in fact applicable to non-lexical 
data for deriving non-lexical measures. In practice, 
though, they have been constrained by a preoccupa- 
tion with the lexicon as well as by the unavailability 
of phonological data. 2 Hopefully, the phonological 
data developed in this project should provide fresh 
input to those methods and revive their application 
to the problem area in future research. 
2 Data  
The data we use to illustrate our ideas are two 
phonological histories taken from the field of Chi- 
nese linguistics. One is an account of the Modern 
Beijing (MB) dialect from an earlier stage of Chi- 
nese, referred to as Middle Chinese, and published 
as Chen (1976); the other is an account of the Mod- 
ern Cantonese (MC) dialect also from Middle Chi- 
nese, published as Chen and Newman (1984a, 1984b 
and 1985). These should be consulted for further ex- 
planation of the diachronic rules and their relative 
chronology as well as for an explanation of the rule 
labels used in this paper. For brevity, we will refer 
to the former as Chen76 and the latter as CN84 in 
subsequent sections. We would now like to draw at- 
tention now to five features of these accounts which 
make them ideal for the purpose at hand: 
2This was also pointed out by Professor Sheila Em- 
bleton, York University, Toronto in a personal communi- 
cation: Comment on using a phonological dissimilarity 
measure. In email correspondence dt. 9 Oct 1994. 
t 
1. The accounts are relatively explicit in their ex- 
positions. Each account assumes Middle Chi- 
nese reconstructions which are phonetically ex- 
plicit, states each rule in a formal style, and de- 
fines the ordering relationships which hold be- 
tween the rules. This degree of comprehensive- 
ness and explicitness in writing the history of a 
language is relatively rare. It is even rarer to 
have accounts of two related dialects described 
in a similarly explicit way. Obviously, when 
it comes to translating historical accounts into 
phonological derivations, the more explicit the 
original account, the more readily one can ar- 
rive at the derivations. 
2. The two accounts assume identical reconstruc- 
tions for the Middle Chinese forms, which of 
course is crucial in any meaningful comparison 
of the two dialects. Not surprisingly, given the 
existence of Sinology as an established field and 
one with a history going back well over a hun- 
dred years, there are many conflicting propos- 
als about Middle Chinese and its pronunciation. 
Decisions about the forms of Middle Chinese go 
hand in hand, necessarily, with corresponding 
decisions about the historical rules which lead 
from those forms to modern-day reflexes. One 
can not easily compare competing historical ac- 
counts if they assume different reconstructed 
forms as their starting points. See Chen76 for a 
full description and justification of the Middle 
Chinese reconstructions u ed in these accounts. 
3. The two accounts are couched in terms of one 
phonological framework. This, too, is a highly 
desirable feature when it comes to making com- 
parisons between the sets of rules involved in 
each account. The framework could be de- 
scribed as a somehwat "relaxed" version of SPE 
(Chomsky and Halle, 1968). For example, the 
accounts make use of orthodox SPE features 
alongside others where it was thought appro- 
priate (e.g. \ [+/- labial \ ] ,  \ [+/-  acute\]). Phono- 
tactic conditions are utilized as a way of trig- 
gering certain phonological changes, alongside 
more conventional rule statements. 
4. The accounts purport to describe the phono- 
logical histories of a single database of Chinese 
characters and their readings in modern dialects 
(Zihui, 1962). This is a substantial database 
containing about 2,700 Chinese characters and 
it is the readings of these characters in two 
of the dialects - -  Modern Beijing and Modern 
Cantonese dialects which are the outputs of the 
rule derivations in the two accounts. 
5. The accounts themselves are published in an 
easily available journal, The Journal o\] Chinese 
Linguistics, which allows readers to scrutinize 
the original discussion and rule statements. 
The features alluded to in points 1-5 make these 
two accounts uniquely suited to testing out formal 
hypotheses relating to historical phonology. The 
historical account of Modern Beij ing/Modern Can- 
tonese is construed as a set of derivations. The in- 
put to a derivation is a reconstructed Middle Chinese 
form; the input is subjected to a battery of (ordered) 
phonological rules; and the output of the derivation 
is the reflex in the modern dialect. 
3 Mode l l ing  Phono log ica l  
Complex i ty  
The mechanistic model we have used to represent 
diachronic phonological derivations is that of Prob- 
abilistic Finite State Automata (PFSA). These are 
state determined machines which have stochastic 
transition functions. The derivation of each word 
in MB or MC from Middle Chinese consists of a 
sequence of diachronic rules. These rule sequences 
for each of the approximately 2700 words are used 
to construct our PFSA. Node 0 of the PFSA cor- 
responds to the reconstructed form of the word in 
Middle Chinese. Arcs leading out of states in the 
PFSA represent particular ules that were applied 
to a form at that state, transforming it into a new 
intermediate form. A transition on a delimiter sym- 
bol, which always returns to state 0, signifies the end 
of a derivation process whereby the final form in the 
daughter language has been arrived at. The weight- 
ings on the arcs represent the number of times that 
particular arc was traversed in processing the entire 
corpus of words. The complete PFSA then repre- 
sents the phonological complexity of the derivation 
process from Middle Chinese into one of the modern 
dialects. 
If this is the case, then the length of the min- 
imal description of the PFSA would be indicative 
of the distance between the parent and daughter 
languages. There are two levels at which the di- 
achronic complexity can be measured. The first 
is of the canonical PFSA, which is a trie encod- 
ing of the rules. This is the length of the di- 
achronic phonological hypothesis accounting for the 
given dataset. The second is of a minimised ver- 
sion of the canonical machine. Our minimisation 
is performed initially using the sk-strings method 
of Raman and Patrick (1997b) and then reducing 
:Z 
the resultant automaton further with a beam search 
heuristic (1997a). The sk-strings method constructs 
a non-deterministic finite state automaton from its 
canonical version by successively merging states that 
are indistinguishable for the top s% of their most 
probable output strings limited to a length of k sym- 
bols. Both s and k are variable parameters that can 
be set when starting program execution. In this pa- 
per, the reduced automata re the best ones that 
could be inferred using any value of string size (k) 
from 1 to 10 and any value of the agreement per- 
centage (s) from 1 to 100. The beam search method 
reduces the PFSA by searching recursively through 
the best m descendants of the current PFSA where a 
descendant is defined to be the result of merging any 
two nodes in the parent PFSA. The variable param- 
eter m is called the beam size and determines the ex- 
haustiveness of the search. In this paper, m was set 
to 200, which was the maximum the Sun Sparcserver 
1000 with 256 MB of main memory could tolerate. 
The final resultant PFSA, minimised thus is, 
strictly speaking , a generalisation of the proposed 
phonology. Its size is not really indicative of the 
complexity of the original hypothesis, but it serves 
to bring to light important patterns which repeat 
themselves in the data. The minimisation, in effect, 
forms additional diachronic rules and highlights reg- 
ular patterns to a linguist. The size of this structure 
is also given in our results to show the effect of fur- 
ther generalisation to the linguistic hypothesis. 
A final point needs to be made regarding the mo- 
tivation for the; additional sophistication embodied 
in this method as compared to, say, a more sim- 
plistic phonological approach like a distance mea- 
sure based on a: simple summation of the number of 
proposed rules. Our method not only gives a mea- 
sure dependent on the number of rules, but also on 
the inter-relationship between them, or the regular- 
ity present in the whole phonology. A lower value 
indicates the p~esence of greater egularity in the 
derivation process. As a case in point, we may look 
at two closely related dialects, which have the same 
number of rules in their phonology from a common 
parent. It may be the case that one has diverged 
more by losing more of its original structure. As in 
the method of internal reconstruction, if we assume 
that the complexity of a language increases with 
time due to the presence of residual forms (Crow- 
ley, 1987, p.150-453), the PFSA derived for the more 
distant language will have a greater complexity than 
the other. 
4 P rocedura l  Dec is ions  
The derivations that were used in constructing the 
PFSA were traced out individually for each of the 
2714 forms and entered into a spreadsheet for fur- 
ther processing. The Relative Chronologies (RC) of 
the diachronic rules given in Chen76 and CN84 pro- 
pose rule orderings based on bleeding and feeding 
relationships between rules. 3 We have tried to be as 
consistent as possible to the RC proposed in Chen76 
and CN84. For the most part, we view violations to 
the RC as exceptions to their hypothesis. Consis- 
tency with the RC proposed in Chen76 and CN84 
has been maintained as far as possible. For the most 
part, violations to them are viewed as serious excep- 
tions. Thus if Rule A is ordered before Rule B in 
the RC, but is required to apply after Rule B in 
a specific instance under consideration, it is made 
an exceptional application of Rule A, denoted by 
"\[A\]". Such exceptional rules are considered istinct 
from their normal forms. The sequence of rules de- 
riving Beijing tou from Middle Chinese *to ("all"), 
for example, is given as "tl-split:ralse-u:diphthong- 
u:chameh". However, "diphthong-u" is ordered be- 
fore "ralse-u" in the RC. The earlier rule in the 
RC is thus made an exceptional application and 
the rule sequence is given instead as "tl-split:raise- 
u:\[diphthong-u\]:chamel:". 
There are also some exceptional phonological 
changes not accounted for by CN84 or Chen76. In 
these cases, we form a new rule representing the 
change that took place, denote it in square brack- 
ets to show its exceptional status. Related ex- 
ceptions are grouped together as a single excep- 
tional rule. For example, Tone-4 in Middle Chi- 
nese only changes to Tone-la or Tone-2 in Beijing 
when the form has a voiceless initial. However, for 
the Middle Chinese form *niat ("pinch with fin- 
gers") in Tone-4, the corresponding Beijing form is 
hie in Tone-la. Since the n-initial is voiced, the t4- 
tripart rule is considered to apply exceptionally. The 
complete rule sequence is thus denoted by "raise- 
i:apocope:chamel:\[t4\]:" where the "It4\]" exceptional 
rule covers cases when Tone-4 in SMC unexpectedly 
changed into Tone-la or Tone-2 in Beijing in the 
absence of a voiceless initial. 
It also needs to be mentioned that there are a few 
cases where an environment for the application of a 
rule might exist, but the rule itself may not apply al- 
though it is required to by the linguistic hypothesis. 
3If rule A precludes rule B from applying by virtue 
of applying before it, then A is said to bleed B. If rule 
A causes rule B to apply by applying before it, it is said 
to feed rule B. 
3 
This would constitute an exception again. The de- 
tails of how to handle this situation more accurately 
are left as a topic for future work, but we try to ac- 
count for it here by applying a special rule \[!A\] where 
the '!' is meant to indicate that the rule A didn't 
apply when it ought to have. As an example, we 
may consider the derivation of Modern Cantonese 
hap(Tone 4a) from Middle Chinese *khap(Tone 4) 
("exactly"). The sequence of rules deriving the MC 
form is "t4-split:spirant:x-weak:". However, since 
the environment is appropriate (voiceless initial) for 
the application of a further rule, AC-split, after t4- 
split had applied, the non-application of this addi- 
tional rule is specified as an exception. Thus, "t4- 
split:spirant:x-weak:\[!AC-split\]:" s the actual rule 
sequence used. 
In general, the following conventions in represent- 
ing and treating exceptions have been followed as far 
as possible: Exceptional rules are always denoted in 
square brackets. They are considered excluded from 
the l:tC and thus are consistently ordered at the end 
of the rest of the derivation process wherever possi- 
ble. 
A final detail concerns the status of allophonic 
changes in the phonology. The derivation process 
is actually two-stage, comprising a diachronic phase 
during which phonological changes take place and 
a synchronic phase during which allophonic hanges 
are automatically applied. Changes caused by Can- 
tonese or Beijing Phonotactic Constraints (PCs) are 
treated as allophonic rules and fall into the syn- 
chronic category, whereas PCs applying to earlier 
forms are treated in line with the regular diachronic 
rules which Chen76 calls P-rules. 
A minor problem presents itself when it comes to 
making a clear-cut separation between the historical 
rules proper and the synchronic allophonic rules. In 
Chen76 and CN84, they are not really considered 
part of the historical derivation process. Yet it was 
found that the environment for the application of a 
diachronic rule is sometimes produced by an allo- 
phonic rule. Such feeding relationships between al- 
lophonic and diachronic rules make the classification 
of those allophonic rules difficult. 
The only rule considered allophonic in Beijing 
is the *CHAMEL PC, this being a rule which de- 
termines the exact qualities of MB vowels. For 
Cantonese, CN84 has included two allophonic rules 
within its RC under bleeding and feeding relation- 
ships with P-rules. These are the BREAK-C and 
Y-FUSE rules, both of which concern vocalic detail. 
In these cases, every instance of their application 
within the diachronic phonology has been treated as 
an exception, effectively elevating these exceptions 
to the status of diachronic rules. In other cases, as 
with other allophonic rules, they are always ordered 
after all the diachronic rules. Since the problem re- 
garding the status of allophonic rules in general is 
properly in the domain of historical inguists, it is 
beyond the scope of this work. It was thus decided 
to provide two complexity measures - -  one includ- 
ing allophonic detail and one excluding all allophonic 
detail not required for the derivation process. 
5 M in imum Message  Length  
The Minimum Message Length (MML) principle of 
Georgeff and Wallace (1984) is used to compute the 
complexity of the PFSA. For brevity, we will hence- 
forth call the Minimum Message Length of PFSA as 
the MML of PFSA or where the context serves to 
disambiguate, simply MML. 
In the context of data transmission, the MML of a 
set of symbols is the minimum number of bits needed 
to transmit a static model together with the data 
symbols given this model a priori. In the context of 
PFSA, the MML is a sum of: 
? the length of encoding a description of the pro- 
posed machine 
? the length of encoding the dataset assuming it 
was emitted by the proposed machine 
The following formula is used for the purpose of com- 
puting the MML: 
N - 1)!  
 {mj + log + 
j=l (mj - 1)! I-I (nij - 1)! 
i= l  
mj logY + m~- logN} - log(N - 1)! 
where N is the number of states in the PFSA, tj is 
the number of times the j th state is visited, V is the 
cardinality of the alphabet including the delimiter 
symbol, nij the frequency of the ith arc from the 
j th state, mj is the number of different arcs from 
the j th state and m} is the number of different arcs 
on non-delimiter symbols from the j th state. The 
logs are to the base 2 and the MML is in bits. 
The MML formula given above assumes a non- 
uniform prior on the distribution of outgoing arcs 
from a given state. This contrasts with the MDL 
criterion due to Rissanen (1978) which recommends 
the usage of uniform priors. The specific prior used 
in the specification of my is 2 -mj,  i.e. the prob- 
ability that a state has n outgoing arcs is 2 -n. 
Thus mj is directly specified in the formula using 
just mj bits and the rest of the structure specifi- 
cation assumes this. It is also assumed that tar- 
gets of transitions on delimiter symbols return to 
4" 
the start state (State 0 for example) and thus don't 
have to be specified. The formula is a modifi- 
cation for non-deterministic automata of the for- 
mula in Patrick and Chong (1987) where it is stated 
with two typographical errors (the factorials in the 
numerators are absent). It is itself a correction 
(through personal communication) of the formula in 
Wallace and Georgeff (1984) which follows on from 
work in numerical taxonomy (Wallace and Boulton, 
1968) that apljlied the MML principle to derive in- 
formation me~ures for classification. 
6 Resu l t s  
The results of our analysis are given in Tables 1 (for 
canonical PFSA) and 2 (for reduced PFSA). Row 1 
represents PFSA which have only diachronic detail 
in them and Row 2 represents PFSA which do not 
distinguish between diachronic and allophonic de- 
tail. Column 1 represents he MML of the PFSA de- 
rived for Modern Cantonese and and column 2 rep- 
resents the MML of PFSA for Modern Beijing. As 
mentioned in Section 3, smaller values of the MML 
reflect a greater egularity in the structure. 
Cantonese Beijing 
Diachronic 35243.58 bits 36790.93 bits 
only (1168 states, (1212 states, 
1167 arcs) 1211 arcs) 
Diachronic + 37782.43 bits 39535.43 bits 
Allophonic (1321 states, (1468 states, 
1320 arcs) 1467 arcs) 
Table 1: MMLs for 
Chinese to Modern 
respectively 
the canonical PFSA for Middle 
Cantonese and Modern Beijing 
Diachronic 
only 
Diachronic + 
Allophonic 
Cantonese Beijing 
30379.01 bits 
(174 states, 
640 arcs) 
32711.49 bits 
(195 states, 
707 arcs) 
30366.55 bits 
(142 states, 
595 arcs) 
31585.79 bits 
(153 states, 
634 arcs) 
Table 2: MMLs for the reduced PFSA for Middle 
Chinese to Modern Cantonese and Modern Beijing 
respectively 
The canonical PFSA are too large and complex to 
be printed on ~4 paper using viewable type. How- 
ever, it is possible to trim off some of the low fre- 
quency arcs froria the reduced PFSA to alleviate the 
problem of presenting them graphically. Thus the 
reduced PFSA for Modern Beijing and Modern Can- 
tonese are presented in Figures 1 and 2 at the end 
of this paper, but arcs with a frequency less than 
10 have been pruned from them. Since several arcs 
have been pruned, the PFSA may not make com- 
plete sense as some nodes may have outgoing tran- 
sitions without incoming ones and vice-versa. There 
is further a small amount of overprinting. They are 
solely for the purposes of visualisation of the end- 
results and not meant o serve any other useful pur- 
pose. The arc frequencies are indicated in super- 
script font above the symbol, except when there is 
more than one symbol on an arc, in which case the 
frequencies are denoted by the superscript marker 
..... Exclamation marks ("!") indicate arcs on de- 
limiter symbols to state 0 from the state they super- 
script. Their superscripts represent the frequency. 
Superficially, the PFSA may seem to resemble the 
graphical representation f the Relative Chronolo- 
gies in Chen76 and CN84, but in fact they are more 
significant. They represent the actual sequences of 
rules used in deriving the forms rather than just the 
ordering relation among them. The frequencies on 
the arcs also give an idea of how many times a par- 
ticular rule was applied to a word at a certain stage 
of its derivation process. Certain rules that rarely 
apply may not show up in the diagram, but that is 
because arcs representing them have been pruned. 
The MML computation process, however, accounted 
for those as well. 
The complete data corpus, an explanation of the 
various exceptions to rules and the programs for con- 
structing and reducing PFSA are available from the 
authors. 
7 D iscuss ion  
The results obtained from the MMLs of canonical 
machines how that there is a greater complexity 
in the diachronic phonology of Modern Beijing than 
there is in Modern Cantonese. These complexity 
measures may be construed as measures of distances 
between the languages and their ancestor. Never- 
theless we exercise caution in interpreting the re- 
sults as such. The measures were obtained using just 
one of many reconstructions of Middle Chinese and 
one of many proposed iachronic phonologies. It is, 
of course, hypothetically possible that a simplistic 
reconstruction a d an overly generalised phonology 
could give smaller complexity measures by result- 
ing in less complex PFSA. One might argue that 
this wrongly indicates that the method of obtain- 
ing distances as described here points to the simplis- 
tic reconstruction as the better one. This problem 
5 
arises partly because of the fact that the methodol- 
ogy outlined here assumes all linguistic hypotheses 
to be equally likely a-priori. We note, however, that 
simplicity and descriptive conomy are not the only 
grounds for preferring one linguistic hypothesis to 
another (Bynon, 1983, p.47). Many other factors are 
usually taken into consideration to ensure whether 
a reconstruction is linguistically viable. Plausibil- 
ity and elegance (Harms, 1990, p.314), knowledge of 
what kinds of linguistic changes are likely and what 
are unlikely (Crowley, 1987, p.90), and in the case of 
Chinese, insights of the "Chinese philological tradi- 
tion" (Newman, 1987) are all used when deciding the 
viability of a linguistic reconstruction. Thus, a final 
conclusion about the linguistic problem of subgroup- 
ing is still properly within the domain of historical 
linguists. This paper just provides a valuable tool to 
help quantify one of the important parameters that 
is used in their decision procedure. 
We make a further observation about the results 
that the complexity measures for the phonologies of 
Modern Beijing and Modern Cantonese are not im- 
mensely different from each other. Interestingly also, 
while the MML of the canonical PFSA for Modern 
Beijing is greater than that for Modern Cantonese, 
the MML of the reduced PFSA for Modern Bei- 
jing is less than that for Modern Cantonese. While 
the differences might be within the margin of error 
in constructing the derivations and the PFSA, it is 
possible to speculate that the generalisation process 
has been able to discern more structure in the di- 
achronic phonology of Modern Beijing than in Mod- 
ern Cantonese. From a computational point of view, 
one could say that the scope for further generalisa- 
tion of the diachronic rules is greater for Modern 
Cantonese than for Modern Beijing or that there is 
greater structure in the evolution of Modern Beijing 
from Middle Chinese than in the evolution of Can- 
tonese. One could perhaps claim that this is due to 
the extra liberty taken historically by current Mod- 
ern Cantonese speakers to introduce changes into 
their language as compared to their Mandarin speak- 
ing neighbours. But it would be nffive to  conclude 
so here. The study of the actual socio-cultural fac- 
tors which would have resulted in this situation is 
beyond the scope of this paper. 
It is also no surprise that the MMLs obtained for 
the two languages are not very different from each 
other although the difference is large enough to be 
statistically significant. 4 Indeed, this is to be ex- 
4\?e are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for rais- 
ing the question of what the smallest difference in MML 
would be before having significance. At least one of the 
present authors claims the difference in MML for a single 
pected as they are both contemporary and have de- 
scended from a common ancestor. We can expect 
more interesting results when deriving complexity 
measures for the phonologies of languages that are 
more widely separated in time and space. It is here 
that the method described in this paper can provide 
an effective tool for subgrouping. 
8 Conc lus ion  and  Future  Work  
In this paper, we have provided an objective frame- 
work which will enable us to obtain distance mea- 
sures between related languages. The method has 
been illustrated and the first step towards actually 
applying it for historical Chinese linguistics has also 
been taken. It has been pointed out to us, though, 
that the methodology described in this paper could 
in fact be put to better use than in just deriv- 
ing distance measures. The suggestion was that it 
should be possible, in principle, to use the method 
to choose between competing reconstructions of pro- 
tolanguages as this tends to be a relatively more con- 
tentious area than subgrouping. 
It is indeed possible to use the method to do this 
- -  we could retain the basic procedure, but shift the 
focus from studying two descendants of a common 
parent to studying two proposed parents of a com- 
mon set of descendants. A protolanguage is usually 
postulated in conjunction with a set of diachronic 
rules that derive forms in the descendant languages. 
We could thus use the methodology described in this 
paper to derive a large number of forms in the de- 
scendant languages from each of the two competing 
protolanguages. Since descriptive conomy is one of 
the deciding factors in selecting historical inguistic 
hypotheses, the size of each body of derivations, uit- 
ably encoded in the form of automata, in conjunc- 
tion with other linguistic considerations will then 
give the plausibility of that reconstruction. Further 
study of this line of approach is, however, left as a 
topic for future research. 
Re ferences  
Bynon, T. 1983. Historical linguistics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Chen, Matthew Y. 1976. From Middle Chinese to 
set of data to be approximately an odds ratio. Thus, a 
difference of n bits (however small n is) would point to an 
odds ratio of 1:2 n that the larger PFSA is more complex 
than the smaller one. The explanation is not directly 
applicable in this case as we are comparing two differ- 
ent data sets and so further theoretical developments are 
necessary. 
Modern Peking. Journal off Chinese Linguistics, 
4(2/3):113-277. 
Chen, Matthew Y. and John Newman. 1984a. From 
Middle Chinese to Modern Cantonese: Part I. 
Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 12(1):148-194. 
Chen, Matthew Y. and John Newman. 1984b. From 
Middle Chinese to Modern Cantonese: Part II. 
Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 12(2):334-388. 
Chen, Matthew Y. and John Newman. 1985. From 
Middle Chinese to Modern Cantonese: Part III. 
Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 13(1):122-170. 
Cheng, Chin-Chuan. 1982. A quantification of Chi- 
nese dialect affinity. Studies in the Linguistic Sci- 
ences, 12(1):29-47. 
Chomsky, Noam and Morris Halle. 1968. The sound 
pattern of English. Harper and Rowe, New York. 
Cihui. 1964. Hanyu Fangyan Cihui, (A lexicon of 
Han Dialects). Wenzi Gaige Chubanshe, Beijing. 
Compilation .by Beijing University. 
Crowley, T. 1987. An introduction to historical lin- 
guistics. University of Papua New Guinea Press. 
Embleton, S. M. 1991. Mathematical methods 
of genetic classification. In S. L. Lamb and 
E. D. Mitchell, editors, Sprung from some com- 
mon source. Stanford University Press, Stanford, 
California, pages 365-388. 
Georgeff, M. P. and C. S. Wallace. 1984. A general 
selection criterion for inductive inference. In Tim 
O'Shea, editor, ECAI-84: Advances in artificial 
intelligence. Elsevier, North Holland, Dordrecht, 
pages 473-481. 
Grimes, J. E. and F. B. Agard. 1959. Linguistic 
divergence in Romance. Language, 35:598-604. 
Harms, R. T. 1990. Synchronic rules and diachronic 
"laws": The Saussurean dichotomy reaffirmed. 
In E. C. Polom~, editor, Trends in linguistics: 
Studies and monographs: 48. Mouton de Gruyter, 
Berlin, pages 313-322. 
Hsieh, Hsin-I. 1973. A new method of dialect 
subgrouping. Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 
1(1):63-92. iReprinted in William S-Y Wang 
(Ed.), The lexicon in phonological change, pp.159- 
196. The Hague: Mouton, 1977. 
Newman, John. 1987. The evolution of a Can- 
tonese phonotactic constraint. Australian Journal 
of Linguistics; 7:43-72. 
Patrick, Jon D.~ and K. E. Chong. 1987. Real- 
time inductive inference for analysing human be- 
haviour. In Proceedings of the Australian joint AI 
conference, pages 305-322, Sydney. 
Raman, Anand V. and Jon D. Patrick. 1997a. 
Beam search and simba search for PFSA infer- 
ence. Tech Report 2/97, Massey University Infor- 
mation Systems Department, Palmerston North, 
New Zealand. 
Raman, Anand V. and Jon D. Patrick. 1997b. The 
sk-strings method for inferring PFSA. In Pro- 
ceedings of the workshop on automata induction, 
grammatical inference and language acquisition 
at the 14th international conference on machine 
learning --  ICML'97, page (in press), Nashville, 
Tennessee. 
Rissanen, J. 1978. Modeling by shortest data de- 
scription. Automatica, 14:465-471. 
Streeter, Mary L. 1977. Doc, 1971: A Chinese 
dialect dictionary on computer. In William S-Y 
Wang, editor, The lexicon in phonological change. 
Mouton, The Hague, pages 101-119. 
Wallace, C. S. and D. M. Boulton. 1968. An in- 
formation measure for classification. Computer 
Journal, 11:185-194. 
Wallace, C. S. and M. P. Georgeff. 1984. A gen- 
eral objective for inductive inference. Tech Report 
TR-84/44, Monash University, Computer Science 
Department, Clayton, Victoria. 
Zihui. 1962. Hanyu Fangyin Zihui, (A Pronounc- 
ing Dictionary of Han Dialects). Wenzi Gaige 
Chubanshe, Beijing. Compilation by Beijing Uni- 
versity. 
7 
es 
rime" 
""<~:9 
!"10 
\ !^31 
ralSe.U ~? 
~)-  
!^29 
Figure 1: Reduced PFSA for the diachronic phonology from Middle Chinese to Modern Beijing (Allophonic 
detail excluded) 
S f/? 
? ~ -wC"  
Figure 2: Reduced PFSA for the diachronic phonology from Middle Chinese to Modern Cantonese (Allo- 
phonic detail excluded) 
9 

