Clarification Dialogues as Measure to Increase Robustness in a 
Spoken Dialogue System 
E l i sabeth  Ma ier  Norber t  Re i th inger  Jan  A lexandersson  
DFK I  GmbH 
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3 
D-66123 Saarbriicken, Germany 
{maier, reithinger, alexanders son}@dfki, uni-sb, de 
Abst rac t  
A number of methods are implemented in 
the face-to-face translation system VERB- 
MOBIL to improve its robustness. In this 
paper, we describe clarification dialogues 
as one method to deal with incomplete or 
inconsistent information. Currently, three 
? types of clarification dialogues are realized: 
subdialogues concerning phonological m- 
biguities, unknown words and semantic in- 
consistencies. For each clarification type 
we discuss the detection of situations and 
system states which lead to their initializa- 
tion and explain the information flow dur- 
ing processing. 
1 D ia logue  Process ing  in  VERBMOBIL 
The implemented research prototype of the speech- 
to-speech translation system VERBMOBIL (Bub and 
Schwinn, 1996) consists of more than 40 modules for 
both speech and linguistic processing. In the sys- 
tem, different processing streams are realized: con- 
currently with a deep linguistic-based analysis, two 
methods of shallow processing are realized. On the 
basis of a set of selection heuristics, the best trans- 
lation is chosen for synthesis n the target language. 
The central system repository for discourse infor- 
mation is the dialogue module. Like all subcompo- 
nents of the VERBMOBIL system the dialogue module 
is faced with incomplete and incorrect input, and 
with missing information. Therefore we have de- 
cided to use a combination ofseveral simple and ef- 
ficient approaches, which together form a robust and 
efficient processing platform for the implementation 
of the dialogue module. 
1.1 The Tasks of the Dialogue Component 
The dialogue component of the VERBMOBIL system 
fulfills a whole range of tasks: 
? it provides contextual information for other 
VERBMOBIL components. These components 
are allowed to store (intermediate) processing 
results in the so-called ialogue memory (Maier, 
1996); 
? the dialogue memory merges the results of the 
various parallel processing streams, represents 
them consistently and makes them accessible in 
a uniform manner (Alexandersson, Reithinger, 
and Maier, 1997); 
? on the basis of the content of the dialogue mem- 
ory inferences can be drawn that are used to 
augment the results processed by other VERB- 
MOBIL components; 
? taking the history of previous dialogue states 
into account, the dialogue component predicts 
which dialogue state is most likely to occur next 
(Reithinger et ai., 1996). 
The dialogue component does not only have to be 
robust against unexpected, faulty or incomplete in- 
put, it also corrects and/or improves the input pro- 
vided by other VERBMOBIL components. Among the 
measures to achieve this goal is the possibility to 
carry out clarification dialogues. 
1.2 The Architecture of the Dialogue 
Component  
The dialogue component is realized as a hybrid ar- 
chitecture: it contains statistical and knowledge- 
based methods. Both parts work with dialogue acts 
(Bunt, 1981) as basic units of processing. The statis- 
tics module is based on data automatically derived 
from a corpus annotated with dialogue acts. It de- 
termines possible follow-up dialogue acts for every 
utterance. The plan recognizer as knowledge-based 
module of the dialogue component incorporates a 
dialogue model, which describes equences of dia- 
logue acts as occurring in appointment scheduling 
dialogues (Alexandersson a d Reithinger, 1995). 
33 
For the representation f contextual information 
a dialogue memory has been developed which con- 
sists of two subcomponents: the Sequence Memory, 
which mirrors the sequential order in which the ut- 
terances and the related dialogue acts occur, and 
the Thematic Structure, which consists of instances 
of temporal categories and their status in the dia- 
logue. Both components are closely intertwined so 
that for every utterance of the dialogue the available 
information can be easily accessed. 
2 S t ra teg ies  fo r  Robust  D ia logue  
Process ing  
The dialogue module has to face one major point 
of insecurity during operation: the user's dialogue 
behavior cannot be controlled. While the dialogue 
module incorporates models that represent the ex- 
pected moves in an appointment scheduling dialogue 
users frequently deviate from this course. Since no 
module in VERBMOBIL must ever fail, we apply var- 
ious recovery methods to achieve a high degree of 
robustness. In the plan recognizer, for example, ro- 
bustness is ensured by dividing the construction of 
the intentional structure into several processing lev- 
els. If the construction of parts of the structure fails, 
recovery strategies are used. An important ingredi- 
ence of dialogue processing is the possibility of re- 
pair: in case the plan construction encounters un- 
expected input it uses a set of repair operators to 
recover. If parts of the structure cannot be built, we 
estimate on the basis of predictions what informa- 
tion the knowledge gap is most likely to contain. 
To contribute to the correctness of the overall sys- 
tem we perform different kinds of clarification dia- 
logues with the user. They will be explained in more 
detail in the remainder of this paper. 
In the current implementation f the VERBMOBIL 
system, two types of clarification dialogues occur: 
? human-human subdia logues  where a dia- 
logue participant elicits unclear or missing infor- 
mation from his or her dialogue partner. Typ- 
ical cases occur when a dialogue contribution 
contains ambiguous information as e.g. in the 
following dialogue fragment: 
A: What about meeting on Friday? 
B: Which Friday are you talking about? 
A: Friday February 28. 
This type of clarification dialogue is processed 
without any active intervention by the dialogue 
component: the individual utterances are an- 
alyzed and translated by the various process- 
ing streams while the dialogue component en- 
ters the results into the dialogue memory. 
? human-mach ine  subd ia logues  where the 
machine ngages in a dialogue with the user to 
elicit information eeded for correct processing. 
In the following we focus on this latter type of 
clarification dialogues. In our current system we 
only implemented clarification dialogues where the 
potential user of VERBMOBIL is likely to have suf- 
ficient expertise to provide the information eces- 
sary for clarification; where the problems presented 
to the user require too much linguistic expertise we 
consider different recovery strategies (e.g. the use 
of defaults). The following types of clarification di- 
alogues are incorporated in our system1: 
1. dialogues about phono- 
logical similarities (similar_words) which cope 
with possible confusions of phonetically similar 
words like Juni vs. Juli (engh: June vs. July); 
2. dialogues about words unknown to the system, 
in particular unknown to the speech recognizers 
(unknown_words); 
3. dialogues about inconsistent or inexistent dates 
( incons is tent_date) ,  e.g. um 16 Uhr am Vor- 
mittag (engl.: at 16 hours in the morning) or am 
30. Februar (engl.: on February 30). 
If all of the above types of clarification dialogues 
are enabled all the time they tend to occur too often. 
Empirical studies have shown that interruptions of 
a dialogue - as is the case in clarifications - put 
additional stress on the users and have a negative 
influence on performance and acceptance (Krause, 
1997). Therefore, we implemented the possibility to 
selectively enable and disable the various types of 
clarification dialogues. 
In the following chapter we explain how the vari- 
ous types of clarification dialogues are processed. 
3 P rocess ing  C la r i f i ca t ion  D ia logues  
3.1 P rocess ing  F low 
In the deep processing mode spoken input is sent 
through components for speech recognition, syntac- 
tic and semantic treatment, transfer, tactical gen- 
eration and speech synthesis. The processing re- 
sults of the morphological, syntactic and seman- 
tic components are continuously monitored by the 
dialogue component. For every utterance ut t _ id  
and for each type of clarification dialogue the di- 
alogue component sends a message to the central 
1In the remainder of this paper words printed in 
teletype font indicate full or partial system messages. 
34 
control component of the VERBMOBIL system in- 
dicating whether a clarification dialogue has to be 
executed or not (<x ut t_ id> or <no__x ut t_ id>,  
where x is either similar_words, unknown_words, 
or inconsistent.date). 
If a subdialogue has to be carried out, the clarifica- 
tion mode is switched on (c la r i : f i ca t ion_d ia logue  
on) and the processing flow of the system is changed. 
Depending on the clarification type x, a synthe- 
sized message is sent to the user, informing him/her 
of the necessity and reason for a clarification di- 
alogue. A list of options for recovery is pre- 
sented. In order to minimize processing errors 
the options the user can choose from are formu- 
lated as yes/no questions; a yes-/no recognizer with 
a recognition rate of approx. 100 % developed 
specifically for this purpose processes the user's re- 
sponse. If the user chooses an option that allows 
a continuation of the dialogue it is used to mod- 
ify the system's intermediate r sults; the utterance 
ut t _ id  and the updated message are sent to the con- 
trol module (clarification_dialogue_succeeded 
utt_id <modified-message>), the system switches 
back into the normal processing mode 
(c la r i f i ca t ion_d ia logue  of f ) ,  and computation 
is resumed using the modified data. If the user finds 
none of the presented options appropriate, the user 
is requested to reformulate the original utterance, 
the control component is informed of a failure of 
the subdialogue (clarification.dialogue_failed 
utt_id) and the clarification dialogue is switched off 
(clarification_dialogue off). 
To ensure robustness for clarification dialogues we 
have added a counter to measure the time elapsed 
since a system request (e.g. the presentation of op- 
tions to choose from). If the user does not respond 
within a given time frame, the system assumes a 
negative answer, which leads to a failure of the sub- 
dialogue and the request for a reformulation of the 
initial utterance. All clarification types mentioned in 
this paper are fully implemented. All three subdia- 
logue types follow this uniform processing scheme. 
3.2 Phono log ica l  S imi lar i t ies 
The dialogue system has access to a list of words 
that are often confused on the basis of a high de- 
gree of phonological similarity. Not all of the word 
pairs included in this list are intuitive candidates for 
an average VERBMOBIL user. Examples are e.g. the 
German word pairs Halle -/ahren or Modus - Mor- 
gen. We compiled a subset of this list that contains 
only word pairs that are plausible for a user who has 
no phonological expertise. This list includes word 
pairs like e.g. Sonntag - sonntags (engl.: Sunday - 
sundays) or fiinfzehn - fiin/zig (engl.: fifteen - fifty). 
If the word string processed by the syntac- 
tic/semantic components contains a member Of this 
word list the dialogue initializes the generation of a 
system message that points out the potential confu- 
sion to the user. ' If for example the original input 
sentence is Wie wdr's Sonntag? (engl.: How about 
Sunday?) the system triggers the message VERB- 
MOBIL hat eine mSgliche Verwechslung erkannt. 
Meinen Sie die Angabe 'Sonntag'? (engl.: VERB- 
MOBIL encountered a possible ambiguity. Do you 
mean the word 'Sunday'?). Depending on the an- 
swer of the user either the proposed word is accepted 
or the remaining other candidate is proposed. The 
chosen word is then inserted into the intermediate 
processing result, so that the translation later con- 
tains the word chosen by the user. 
3.3 Unknown Words  
The speech recognizers of the VERBMOBIL system are 
able to recognize input as unknown to the system; 
if such a fragment is encountered the symbol UNK_ 
followed by the SAMBA-transcription (SAM, 1992) of 
the fragment (e.g. <UNK_maI62> for the unknown 
spoken input Maier) is inserted into the output of 
the recognizers. In our domain, unknown words of- 
ten refer to names, e.g. of locations or persons. The 
user is asked to confirm this assumption. A message 
including a synthesized version of the word's SAMBA 
transcription is presented to the user, e.g. Handelt 
es sich bei maI6 um einen Namen? (engl.: Is maI6 
a name?). If this assumption is confirmed, syntac- 
tic processing is continued treating the fragment as 
a name. The SAMPA transcription is later included 
in the output of the English generator and synthe- 
sized accordingly. Further syntactic and semantic 
information is not elicited since such knowledge is 
irrelevant for a satisfactory treatment of names. 
3.4 Semant ic  Incons is tenc ies  
If a user tries to propose nonexistent or inconsistent 
dates, this is signaled to the dialogue component by 
the semantic module. If possible, this module also 
proposes alternative dates. The message 
clarify_date ( \[dom: 31, moy: apr\], \[dom: 30, moy : apr\] ) 
for instance, which is sent from the semantic evalu- 
ation component to the dialogue module, indicates 
both that April 31 is an inconsistent date and that 
the user might have meant April 30. The message 
is coded in terms of a time description language 
developed within VERBMOBIL. It allows to spec- 
ify temporal information using temporal categories 
(e.g. DAY-OF-MONTH (DOM) or MONTH-OF-YEAR 
(MOY)) and instances of these categories (e.g. APRIL 
35 
(APR)). Upon receipt his information it is trans- 
formed into natural anguage and presented to the 
user: Die Angabe 31. April existiert nicht. Meinen 
Sie die Angabe 30. April? (engh The date 'April 
31' does not exist. Do you mean April 30?) If the 
user chooses the alternative date, it is passed on to 
the relevant components and the resulting transla- 
tion includes the correct date. 
4 Related Work 
Various approaches have been proposed to cope with 
problems of unexpected, wrong or missing input: 
(Allen et al, 1996) decided to choose the most 
specific possible option when the system is con- 
fronted with ambiguities. To handle this problem 
the TRAINS system tries to recognize and exploit cor- 
rections included in follow-up dialogue actions. (Qu 
et al, 1997) describe a method to minimize cumu- 
lative error in the ENTHUSIAST system. To this end 
dialogue context, statistical information, and gram- 
mar information are taken into account o process 
and predict dialogue states, where non-contextual 
information is preferred over contextual information 
when processing conflicts occur. 
While clarification dialogues are common in 
human-machine dialogues (see e.g. (Eckert and Mc- 
Glashan, 1993)), they are a rather recent develop- 
ment in systems that support computer-mediated 
interactions. To our knowledge the VERBMOBIL pro- 
totype is the first system that uses repair methods, 
defaults and clarification dialogues to recover from 
problematic system states. 
5 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper we presented a first approach to achieve 
robust processing in VERBMOBIL using clarification 
dialogues. We presented three problems that can be 
resolved using clarification: phonological ambigui- 
ties, unknown words and semantic inconsistencies. 
In the next prototype of the VERBMOBIL system we 
will additionally incorporate methods to resolve lex- 
ical and referential mbiguities. Also, we will tailor 
the interaction to different user classes. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was funded by the German Federal Min- 
istry of Education, Science, Research and Technol- 
ogy (BMBF) in the framework of the VERBMOBIL 
Project under Grant 01IV101K/1. The responsi- 
bility for the contents of this study lies with the 
authors. We thank the VERBMOBIL software inte- 
gration team - in particular Thomas Bub, Andreas 
Klfiter, Stefan Mertens, and Johannes Schwinn - for 
their valuable help. 
References 
Alexandersson, J. and N. Reithinger. 1995. Design- 
ing the Dialogue Component in a Speech Transla- 
tion System - a Corpus Based Approach. In Proc. 
o/TWLT-9, Enschede, Netherlands. 
Alexandersson, J., N. Reithinger, and E. Maier. 
1997. Insights into the Dialogue Processing of 
VERBMOBIL. In Proc. of ANLP-97, pages 33-40, 
Washington, DC. 
Allen, J.F., B.W. Miller, E.K. Ringger, and T. Siko- 
rski. 1996. A Robust System for Natural Spoken 
Dialogue. In Proc. o\] ACL-96, Santa Cruz, CA. 
Bub, Thomas and Johannes Schwinn. 1996. Verb- 
mobil: The evolution of a complex large speech-to- 
speech translation system. In Proe. o\] ICSLP-96, 
pages 2371-2374, Philadelphia, PA. 
Bunt, H. C. 1981. Rules for the Interpretation, 
Evaluation and Generation of Dialogue Acts. In 
IPO Annual Progress Report 16, pages 99-107, 
Tilburg University. 
Eckert, W. and S. McGlashan. 1993. Managing spo- 
ken dialogues for information services. In Proc. o/ 
EUROSPEECH-93, Madrid, Spain. 
Krause, Detlev. 1997. Using an Interpretation Sys- 
tem - Some Observations in Hidden Operator Sim- 
ulations of VERBMOBIL. In E. Maier, M. Mast, 
and S. LuperFoy, eds., Dialogue Processing in Spo- 
ken Language Systems, Springer, Heidelberg. 
Maier, E. 1996. Context Construction as Subtask of 
Dialogue Processing - the VERBMOBIL Case. In 
A. Nijholt, H. Bunt, S. LuperFoy, G. Veldhuijzen 
van Zanten, and J. Schaake, eds., Proc. of TWLT- 
11, pages 113-122, Enschede, Netherlands. 
Qu, Y., B. Di Eugenio, A. Lavie, and C. P. RosS. 
1997. Minimizing Cumulative Error in Discourse 
Context. In E. Maier, M. Mast, and S. LuperFoy, 
eds., Dialogue Processing in Spoken Language Sys- 
tems, Springer, Heidelberg. 
Reithinger, N., R. Engel, M. Kipp, and M. Klesen. 
1996. Predicting Dialogue Acts for a Speech-To- 
Speech Translation System. In Proc. of ICSLP-96, 
pages 654-657, Philadelphia, PA. 
SAM Final Report. ESPRIT Project 2589 (Mul- 
tilingual Speech Input/Output Assessment). See 
http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/sampa/home. 
36 
