Comput ing  prosod ic  p roper t ies  in  a data - to -speech  sys tem 
M. Theune* and E. Klabbers* and J. Odijk and J.R. de Pi jper 
IPO, Center for Research on User-System Interaction 
P.O. Box 513 
5600 MB Eindhoven 
The Netherlands 
theune~ipo, tue. nl 
Abst ract  
We propose a set of rules for the computation 
of prosody which are implemented in an exist- 
ing generic Data-to-Speech system. The rules 
make crucial use of both sentence-internal and 
sentence-external semantic and syntactic in- 
formation provided by the system. In a Text- 
to-Speech system, this information would have 
to be obtained through text analysis, but in 
Data-to-Speech it is readily available, and its 
reliable and detailed character makes it pos- 
sible to compute the prosodic properties of 
generated sentences in a sophisticated way. 
This in turn allows for a close control of pros- 
odic realization, resulting in natural-sounding 
intonation. 
1 Introduction 
The central topic of this paper is the problem of com- 
puting the prosodic properties of sentences gener- 
ated ill Data-to-Speech systems (i.e., systems which 
present data in the form of a spoken monologue - 
sometimes also called 'Concept-to-Speech' systems). 
We propose a set of rules for the assignment of 
prosodic properties which take an explicit discourse 
model into account. In contrast o Text-to-Speech 
systems (and more generally, systems which re- 
quire linguistic analysis of the input), explicit dis- 
course models can be reliably constructed in Data- 
to-Speech systems (and more generally, in systems 
which generate natural anguage from data), so that 
a more natural prosody can be achieved. 
The rules for prosody assignment described in this 
paper are used in the language generation compon- 
*Authors Theune and Klabbers carried out this re- 
search within the framework of the Priority Programme 
Language and Speech Technology (TST). The TST- 
programme is sponsored by NWO (Dutch Organization 
for Scientific Research). 
eat ofD2S, a generic system for the creation of Data- 
to-Speech systems. The method for natural lan- 
guage generation implemented in D2S is hybrid in 
nature (Reiter, 1995); (Coch, 1996). It is a particu- 
lar mixture of (syntactic) template-based techniques 
and full natural language generation, described in 
more detail in Klabbers et al (1997a). A variety 
of Data-to-Speech systems have been and are be- 
ing developed on the basis of D2S. Examples are 
the Dial Your Disc (DYD)-system, which presents 
information in English about Mozart compositions 
(Deemter et al, 1994); (Collier and Landsbergen, 
1995), and the GoalGetter system, which presents 
spoken monologues in Dutch about the course and 
the result of a football game (Klabbers et al, 1997b). 
In this paper, we illustrate the prosodic rules used 
in D2S with examples from GoalGetter. 
After a brief description and illustration of the 
general architecture of D2S, we describe in detail 
how the prosodic component of D2S computes the 
prosodic properties of the generated sentences. Then 
we discuss how the resulting prosodic annotations 
are used in the various speech output techniques em- 
ployed in D2S. We end with some remarks about 
evaluation of the prosodic rules and a conclusion. 
2 Arch i tec ture  of D2S 
The general architecture of D2S is represented in 
Figure 1. It consists of two modules, the Language 
Generation Module (LGM), and the Speech Genera- 
tion Module (SGM). 
The LGM takes data as input and produces en- 
riched text, i.e., prosodically annotated text. For 
instance, it contains annotations to indicate accents 
and prosodic boundaries. This is input to the SGM, 
which turns it into a speech signal. 
Our example system GoalGetter (Klabbers et al, 
1997b) takes data on a football match as input. The 
output of the system is a correctly pronounced, co- 
herent monologue in Dutch which conveys the in- 
39 
data l 
Language 
Generation 
Module 
L 
enriched 
text 1 
Speech 
Generation 
Module 
L 
speech signal 
Figure 1: Global architecture of D2S 
formation on this match. An example of the in- 
put data is given in Figure 2, and one possible out- 
put text is given in Figure 3. In the enriched text, 
pitch accents are indicated by double quotes (") and 
phrase boundaries of varying strength are indicated 
by one to three slashes (/). The other symbols used 
in the text will be clarified in Section 4. 
team 1: PSV 
goals 1: 1 
team 2: Ajax 
goals 2: 3 
goal 2: Kluivert (5) 
goal 2: Kluivert (18) 
goal 2: Blind (83/pen) 
goal 1: Nilis (90) 
referee: Van Dijk 
spectators: 25.000 
yellow 1: Valckx 
Figure 2: Example input of the LGM 
Since we lack the space for a full description of the 
LGM, presented schematically in Figure 4, we only 
point out some important aspects which are relevant 
for the prosodic rules given in Section 3. For a more 
detailed escription, see Klabbers et al (1997a). 
data 
\[ domain data\] I Knowledge State I 
I 1 
T T \[ 
\[ J I Oo=o   I 
enriched 
text 
Figure 4: The architecture of the Language Gener- 
ation Module (LGM) 
The input for the LGM consists of data on spe- 
cific football matches (see Figure 2) and on the do- 
main, e.g., background information on the players 
and the teams. The information in the input can 
be expressed by means of templates in the form of 
a syntactic tree with variable slots. Choice and or- 
dering of the templates and the filling of their slots 
depend on conditions on (1) the Knowledge State, 
which keeps track of which information has been ex- 
pressed, and (2) the Context State, in which various 
aspects of the context are represented (Deemter and 
Odijk, 1995). 
A central part of the Context State is the Dis- 
course Model, which contains information about 
which linguistic expressions have been used in the 
preceding text. Rules formulated in terms of this 
Discourse Model make it possible to use various ref- 
erential expressions (proper names, pronouns, defin- 
ite descriptions, etc.) appropriately. For instance, 
in the fourth sentence of the example text given in 
Figure 3, Dertien minuten later liet de aanvaller zijn 
tweede doelpunt aantekenen ('Thirteen minutes later 
the forward had his second goal noted'), it was pos- 
sible to use a definite description (de aanvaller, 'the 
forward') to refer to Kluivert, because the Discourse 
Model contained an appropriate unique antecedent 
(namely, the proper name Kluivert that was used in 
the third sentence). When a new sentence has been 
generated, the Discourse Model is updated accord- 
ingly, and then the sentence with its full parse tree 
and the updated Discourse Model are input to the 
Prosody module. 
3 Comput ing  prosody  
In this section we present he rules that are used 
in the Prosody module of the LGM, which determ- 
ines the location of accents and phrase boundaries in
a generated sentence on the basis of both syntactic 
40 
"De "wedstrijd tussen "PSV en "Ajax / eindigde 
in "@een/ / -  "@dr ie / / / "  Vijfentwintig duizend 
"toeschouwers / bezochten het "Philipsstadion 
/ / /  
"Ajax ham na "vijf "minuten de "leiding / door 
een "treff~r van "Kluivert / / /"Dert ien minuten 
"later / tier de aanvaller zijn "tweede doelpunt 
aantekenen / / /  De 7o "verdediger "Blind / verzil- 
verde in de "drieentachtigste minuut een "straf- 
schop voor A jax / / /V lak  voor het "eindsignaal 
/ bepaalde "Nilis van "PSV de "eindstand / op 
"@een/ / - "@dr ie / / /  
% "Scheidsrechter van "Dijk / "leidde het duel 
/ / / "  Valckx van "PSV kreeg een "gele "kaar t / / /  
Translation: 
The match between PSV and Ajax ended in 1- 
3. Twenty-five thousand spectators visited the 
Philips stadium. 
After five minutes, Ajax took the lead tlirough 
a goal by Kluivert. Thirteen minutes later the 
forward had his second goal noted. The defender 
Blind kicked a penalty home for Ajax in the 83rd 
minute. Just before the end signal, Nilis of PSV 
brought he final score to 1-3. 
Referee Van Dijk led the match. Valckx of PSV 
received a yellow card. 
Figure 3: Example output of the LGM 
and semantic information. First we will discuss the 
accentuation algorithm, which is based on a version 
of Focus-Accent Theory proposed in (Dirksen, 1992) 
and (Dirksen and Quen~, 1993). In Focus-Accent 
Theory, binary branching metrical trees are used to 
represent the relative prominence of nodes with re- 
spect to pitch accent. 
We will use our previous example sentence, Der- 
tien minuten later liet de aanvaller zijn tweede 
doelpunt aantekenen, as an illustration. First, the 
accentuation algorithm constructs the sentence's 
metrical tree, shown in Figure 5 (simplified). In our 
implementation, this tree corresponds to the sen- 
tence's yntactic tree, 1 except that its nodes have 
focus markers and are labeled weak or strong. The 
focus properties of the nodes in the metrical tree are 
determined as follows. 
Initially, all maximal projections (NP, VP etc.) 
are assigned a positive focus value, indicated as \[+F\]. 
The other nodes are not specified for focus. These 
initial focus values can be changed by non-syntactic 
factors causing the focus value to become negative, 
indicated as I-F\]. This happens in three cases: (1) a 
node dominates an unaccentable word; (2) a node 
represents given information? (3) a node domin- 
ates only nodes which are marked \[-F\]. Unaccentable 
1 Unary branching of metrical trees is allowed. 
2This is based on the observation by Halliday (1967), 
Chafe (Chafe, 1976), Brown (Brown, 1983) and others 
that phrases expressing 'new' information are normally 
accented, while phrases expressing ~given' or 'old' in- 
fbrmation are usually deaccented. 
words, e.g., certain function words, are explicitly lis- 
ted. Our example sentence contains only one such 
word, the determiner de ('the'). The rules for de- 
termining ivenness are based on the theory pro- 
posed by van Deemter (1994), who distinguishes two 
kinds of givenness: object-givenness and concept- 
givenness. 
A phrase is regarded as object-given if it refers to 
a discourse ntity that has been referred to earlier 
in its local discourse domain, which in the present 
implementation consists of all preceding sentences 
in the same paragraph. In the example, checking 
the Discourse Model reveals that the phrases de 
aanvaUer ('the forward') and zijn ('his') are object- 
given, because their referent (Kluivert) was referred 
to in the preceding sentence, which belongs to the 
same paragraph. This means that their dominat- 
ing nodes in the metrical tree must be marked I-F\]. 
This example illustrates that object-givenness does 
not depend on the surface form of the referring ex- 
pression, but only on its referent. The expressions 
de aanvaller and zijn are object-given even though 
they were not used earlier in the text. 
The second kind of givenness, concept-givenness, 
occurs if the root of a word is synonymous (includ- 
ing identity) with the root of a preceding word in 
the local discourse domain, or if the concept ex- 
pressed by the second word subsumes the concept 
expressed by the first word. Our example sentence 
contains two instances of the first case: the words 
rainuten and doelpunt are concept-given, and there- 
fore marked I-F\], due to the presence in the preced- 
41 
CP 
\[+F\] s 
AP C' 
\[+F\] w s 
"dertien C ~  
minuten 
"later IP 
w \[+F\] s
40 
NP VP 
W 
liet \[-F\] w \ [+F l s 
de aanvaller 
NP V ? 
\[+F\] s w 
aantekenen 
DP N' 
I-F\] w s 
zijn 
AP N' 
\[+F l s I-F\] w 
"tweede \[ 
N O 
I-F\] w 
doelpunt 
Figure 5: Metrical tree for the fourth sentence. 
ing sentence of the synonymous words minuten and 
treffer espectively. The second case, subsumption, 
can be illustrated by the sequence Kluivert is een 
heel goede aanvaller; Hij is de beste speler van Ajax 
('Kluivert is a very good forward; He is the best 
player of Ajax'). Since the concept speler  ('player') 
subsumes the concept aanval ler  ('forward'), the 
word speler in the second sentence will be defocused 
due to concept-givenness. 
Note that the first case of concept-givenness is the 
only kind of givenness distinguished in D2S which 
can also be determined in a relatively easy way in un- 
restricted Text-to-Speech systems, e.g., NewSpeak 
(Hirschberg, 1990); (Hirschberg, 1992). The second 
case of concept:givenness, ubsumption, will be very 
difficult to detect in an unrestricted Text-to-Speech 
system because it requires the presence of a concept 
hierarchy, which is only feasible if the relevant con- 
cepts are known in advance. Finally, determining 
object-givenness will also be very difficult in Text- 
to-Speech, because it makes very high demands on 
text analysis. 
Aider the metrical tree nodes have been assigned 
focus markings, their weak/strong labelling can be 
determined. This labelling depends both on the 
structure of the tree and the focus properties of the 
nodes. In Dutch, the structural rule is that the left 
node of two sisters is weak and the right node is 
strong, unless the right node is a zero projection, 
like the V ? node dominating aantekenen i  figure 5.3 
This structural labelling can be changed under the 
influence of focus. If the structurally strong node 
is marked I-F\] while the structurally weak node is 
not, the so-called Default Accent Rule applies and 
the labelling is switched. In figure 5, this happened 
to the AP dominating tweede and the N' dominat- 
ing doelpunt. The N' is marked \[-F\] because all the 
nodes it dominates are marked I-F\]. (See defocusing 
rule (3) given above.) 
After the weak/strong labelling has been determ- 
ined, accents are assigned according to the following 
algorithm: each node that is marked \[+F\] launches 
an accent, which trickles down the tree along a path 
of strong nodes until it lands on a terminal node (a 
word). In our example, the accents launched by CP, 
IP and VP all coincide with the accent launched by 
the NP node dominating zijn tweede doelpunt, finally 
landing on the word tweede. Note that if the word 
doelpunt had not been concept-given, then the N O 
and the N' would not have been marked I-F\] and the 
Default Accent Rule would not have applied. The 
accent would then have landed on doelpunt 
Since the NP node dominating de aanvaller is 
weak, no accent rickles down to it, and because it is 
marked I-F\] it does not launch an accent itself. The 
AP node dominating the phrase dertien minuten 
later (its internal structure is not shown due to lack 
of space) does launch an accent, which trickles down 
to the word later. The NP dertien minuten, which is 
contained in the AP, also launches an accent; since 
this cannot land on the word minuten (which is de- 
focused due to concept-givenness) it ends up on the 
word dertien. 
Recently, an algorithm for the generation of con- 
trastive accent has been added to the GoalGetter 
system. This algorithm assigns a pitch accent to 
phrases which provide contrastive information, over- 
riding deaccentuation due to givenness. For more 
3Evidence for this rule comes from constructions like 
the following: 
(i) Kluivert liep \[vP \[v0 voorbij\] \[Np het doel\]l 
(ii) Kluivert fiep \[vP \[top het doel\] \[v,, voorbij\]\] 
Both (i) and (ii) can be translated as 'Kluivert walked 
past the goal'. Since voorbij is not accented in either 
case, the p0 node should be labeled weak. The fact that 
voorbij is unaccentable in these positions cannot be ex- 
plained by claiming the word itself is unaccentable, since 
in Kluivert liep er voorbij ('Kluivert walked past it') the 
word does receive an accent. 
42 
details on the algorithm, see Theune (1997). 
After accentuation, phrase boundaries are as- 
signed. Three phrase boundary strengths are dis- 
tinguished. 4 The sentence-final boundary ( / / / )  is 
the strongest one. Words which are clause final (i.e., 
the last word in a CP or IP) or which precede a punc- 
tuation symbol other than a comma (e.g., ';') are fol- 
lowed by a mQor boundary (-//). Minor boundaries 
(/) are assigned to other words preceding a comma. 
Additionally, constituents o the left of an I', a C' or 
a maximal projection are followed by a weak bound- 
ary, provided that both constituents are accessible 
for accent, and that the left one has sufficient length 
(more than four syllables). This is a slightly mod- 
ified version of a structural condition proposed by 
Dirksen and Quen@ (1993). In our example only 
the AP dertien minuten later meets this condition 
and is therefore followed by a minor phrase bound- 
ary. Since the sentence contains no punctuation and 
consists of just one clause, the only other phrase 
boundary is the sentence-final one. 
4 Speech  Generat ion  
The SGM has two output modes, phrase concaten- 
ation and phonetics-to-speech, each of which makes 
optimal use of the prosodic markers generated by 
the LGM. We start with a brief description of the 
two output modes, followed by a discussion of the 
prosodic realization in either output mode. 
Phrase  concatenat ion  - Phrase concatenation 
is a technique which tries to reconcile the high- 
fidelity quality and inherent naturalness of prerecor- 
ded speech with the flexibility of synthetic speech. 
Entire phrases and words are recorded, and played 
back in different orders to form complete utterances. 
In this way a large number of utterances can be pro- 
nounced on the basis of a limited number of prerecor- 
(led phrases, saving memory space and increasing 
flexibility. This technique is best applied to a carrier- 
and slot situation where there is a limited number 
of types of utterances (carriers) with variable in- 
formation to be inserted in fixed positions (slots). 
The systems based on D2S fit this situation well. 
The carriers correspond to the syntactic templates 
and these have slots for variable information such as 
match results, player names, etc. 
Successful application of the phrase concatenation 
technique is not quite as trivial as it may seem at 
first sight. If all the phrases are recorded in isola- 
tion without taking their accentuation or their po- 
41n longer texts, containing more complicated con- 
structions, it might be desirable to distinguish more 
levels. Sanderman (1996) proposes a boundary depth 
of five to achieve more natural phrasing. 
sition in the sentence into account, the resulting 
speech will have discontinuities in duration, loud- 
ness and intonation. Our method is more sophistic- 
ated in that different prosodic variants for otherwise 
identical phrases have been recorded. To determine 
how many and what prosodic realizations should be 
recorded for each phrase, a thorough analysis of the 
material the system can generate is required. 
Phonet ics - to -Speech  - Synthetic speech is far 
more flexible than any form of prerecorded speech. 
Since there is complete control over the realization 
it is very well suited to test the accentuation and 
phrasing rules. In commercial pplications synthetic 
speech is not used very often since the naturalness 
of the output speech still leaves a great deal to be 
desired. 
Because the LGM provides all relevant informa- 
tion there is no need for full-fledged text-to-speech 
synthesis. The LGM generates an orthographic rep- 
resentation which has a unique mapping to a phon- 
etic representation. 5 This makes it possible to do 
errorless grapheme-to-phoneme conversion by look- 
ing up the words in a lexicon instead of using rules. 
Our phonetics-to-speech system, SPENGI (SPeech 
synthesis ENGIne) uses diphone concatenation i
either LPC or PSOLA format. The rule formalism 
for intonation is an implementation based on the in- 
tonation theory of 't Hart et al (1990). 
Real iz ing prosody  in speech generat ion  -
The enriched text that the LGM generates contains 
several prosodic markers. In the phrase concaten- 
ation component these markers trigger the choice 
of the appropriate prosodic variant from the phrase 
database and the pauses to be inserted at the appro- 
priate positions. 
The carrier sentences have been recorded in just 
one prosodic version. The variable words that fill 
the slots have been recorded in six different pros- 
odic variants to account for the place in the sentence 
where they occur and the accentuation they receive. 
A word can be either accented or deaccented. We 
did not instruct our speaker as to how to realize the 
accents in the carrier sentences. In the variables we 
just made sure that accents were realized consist- 
ently in each category. When a word occurs before 
a minor phrase boundary the word is realized with a 
continuation rise. A major phrase boundary triggers 
a pause and possibly a lengthening of the word pre- 
ceding the boundary. Before a final phrase bound- 
ary, the word is realized with a final fall. Inserting 
the right words in the right contexts optimizes the 
prosody of the output speech, thus achieving fluency 
5It could also generate a phonetic representation 
directly. 
43 
_A A_/ 
de "wedstrijd tussen "psv en "ajax / "eindigde in "@een 11 "@drie 1/1 
Figure 6: Stylized pitch contour of the introductory sentence 
and a natural rendering. 
In Dutch, the score of a match is pronounced in 
a special way: the major boundary between the two 
numbers triggers lengthening of the first number and 
a pause between the two numbers, but the two ac- 
cented numbers are realized with a so-called 'flat hat' 
pattern as if they were part of the same clause (see 't 
Hart (1990) for a description of pitch movements). 
This is indicated by a special marker used only in 
the phrase concatenation component of GoalGetter 
(the @_-sign). There is another special marker (the 
70-sign) to mark nouns functioning as an adjunct to 
another noun. The special nouns are always accen- 
ted and shorter in duration than when they occur as 
a head noun. Figure 6 shows a stylized pitch contour 
of the opening sentence of Figure 3, which illustrates 
how the score is pronounced. 
In the phonetics-to-speech component the pros- 
odic markers are used to trigger the intonation and 
duration rules. Intonation is represented as a series 
of pitch movements with restrictions on the possible 
combinations of movements. The words that are 
accented are given a prominence-lending pitch pat- 
tern (a pointed hat or a flat hat are most commonly 
used). At the boundaries a pause of some length 
can occur, where the length of the pause depends on 
the strength of the boundary. A boundary can also 
trigger a continuation rise or pre-boundary length- 
ening, as mentioned above. To allow for variation in 
the intonation, each rule has a number of weighted 
alternatives from which a random choice is made 
(taking the weights into account). This also makes 
it possible to have some optional rules, for instance, 
for the melodic highlighting of syntactic boundaries 
which is not obligatory. 
5 Eva luat ion  
Nachtegaal (1997) reports on a small experiment 
which was carried out to test the accentuation al- 
gorithm of D2S. No formal evaluation has taken 
place for the algorithm determining the placement 
of phrase boundaries. 
hL the experiment by Nachtegaal (1997), Dutch 
speakers were asked to read aloud texts generated 
by the LGM of GoalGetter. Recordings of the read 
texts were presented to 'expert listeners' who indic- 
ated on which words they heard an accent. Compar- 
isons were then made between the accentuation pat- 
terns produced by the speakers and those generated 
by the system. The results of the experiment were 
positive: the number of words on which the accen- 
tuation by the speakers deviated from the accentu- 
ation by GoalGetter was very small (less than 470 of 
all accentable words, i.e., excluding 'unaccentables' 
like function words etc.). The texts used in the ex- 
periment contained sentences which were structur- 
ally similar to those of the example text given in 
Figure 3. Not all syntactic onstructions which are 
currently generated by GoalGetter were included in 
the test. The prosody of the current version of Goa l  
Getter was only evaluated informally, but the results 
were in line with those of Nachtegaal (1997). 
The prosodic rules described in this paper have 
also been succesfully implemented in the DYD- 
system (I:LEF), which differs from GoalGetter with 
respect o language (English versus Dutch) and do- 
main (Mozart compositions versus football reports). 
Informal evaluation of the prosody in DYD gave 
equally satisfactory results as for GoalGetter. This 
was as expected, since the prosodic rules of D2S are 
essentially domain- and language independent. 6 All 
things considered, the quality of the prosodic rules 
of D2S is judged to be good. 
6 Conc lus ion  
To determine the prosodic properties of a sentence in 
a text, information about both sentence-internal and 
sentence-external syntax and semantics i needed. In 
Text-to-Speech t is information has to be obtained 
through text analysis, whereas in Data-to-Speech re- 
liable information of this kind is readily available. 
As a consequence, Data-to-Speech provides a bet- 
ter basis for using sophisticated prosody assignment 
rules than Text-to-Speech. 
The prosodic rules discussed in this paper are 
implemented in a generic Data-to-Speech system 
6Only the rule governing the weald/strong labelling 
of the metrical tree nodes has a language-specific para- 
meter. 
44 
called D2S. They make crucial use of both sentence- 
internal and sentence-external semantic and syn- 
tactic information, provided by the system in the 
form of a Discourse Model and parse trees of the 
generated sentences. The reliable and detailed char- 
acter of this information makes it possible to assign 
prosodic markings which are reliable and detailed as 
well. This in turn allows for a close control of pros-- 
odic realization, resulting in natural-sounding ton- 
ation. 
Re i~rences  
Brown, G. 1983. Prosodic structure and the 
given/new distinction. In D. R. Ladd and A. Cut- 
ler, editors, Prosody: Models and Measurements. 
Springer Verlag, Berlin. 
Chai~, W.L. 1976. Givenness, contrastiveness, def- 
initeness, subjects, topics and points of view. In 
C. N. Li, editor, Subject and Topic. Academic 
Press, New York. 
Coch, J. 1996. Evaluating and comparing three 
text-production techniques. In Proceedings COL- 
ING 1996, pages 249-254. 
Collier, R. and J. Landsbergen. 1995. Language and 
speech generation. Philips Journal of Research, 
49(4):419-437. 
Deemter, K. van. 1994. What's new? A semantic 
perspective on sentence accent. Journal of Se- 
mantics, 11:1-31. CSLI report No. CSLI-93-178. 
Deemter, I(. x~n, J. Landsbergen, R. Leermakers, 
and J. Odijk. 1994. Generation of spoken mono- 
logues by means of templates. In Proceedings 
of TWLT 8, pages 87-96, Twente. Twente Uni- 
versity. IPO MS. 1053. 
Deemter, K. van and J. Odijk. 1995. Context 
modeling and the generation of spoken discourse. 
Manuscript 1125, IPO, Eindhoven. Philips Re- 
search Manuscript NL-MS 18 728, to appear in 
Speech Communication 21 (1/2). 
Dirksen, A. 1992. Accenting and deaccenting: A
declarative approach. In Proceedings of COLING 
1992, Nantes, France. IPO MS. 867. 
Dirksen, A. and H. Quen6. 1993. Prosodic ana- 
lysis: The next generation. In van Heuven and 
Pols, editors, Analysis and Synthesis of Speech: 
Strategic Research Towards High-Quality Text-to- 
Speech Generation. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin - 
New York. 
Halliday, M.A.K. 1967. Notes on transitivity and 
theme in English. Journal of linguistics, 3:199- 
244. 
Hirschberg, J. 1990. Accent and discourse context: 
assigning pitch accent in synthetic speech. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 8th National Conference on Artifi- 
cial Intelligence, Menlo Park, 29 July - 3 August, 
1990, pages 952-957. MIT Press. 
Hirschberg, J. 1992. Using discourse context o 
guide pitch accent decisions in synthetic speech. 
In G. Bailly, C. Beno~t, and T.R. Sawallis, editors, 
Talking Machines: Theories, Models and Designs. 
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., pages 367-376. 
Klabbers, E., J. Odijk, J.R. de Pijper, and 
M. Theune. 1997a. From data to speech: A gen- 
eric approach. IPO MS 1202. 
Klabbers, E., J. Odijk, J.R. de Pijper, and 
M. Theune. 1997b. GoalGetter: From Teletext 
to speech, to appear in IPO Annual Progress Re- 
port 31, 1996. 
Nachtegaal, D. 1997. An evaluation of GoalGetter's 
accentuation. Report 1142, IPO, Eindhoven. 
Reiter, E. 1995. NLG vs. templates. In Proceed- 
ings of the Fifth European Workshop on Natural 
Language Generation, pages 95-106, Leiden, 20- 
22 May. University of Leiden. 
Sanderman, A. 1996. Prosodic Phrasing: produc- 
tion, perception, acceptability and comprehension. 
Ph.D. thesis, Eindhoven University, Eindhoven. 
't Hart, J., R. Collier, and A. Cohen. 1990. A 
Perceptual Study of Intonation: an Experimental 
Phonetic Approach to Speech Technology. Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Theune, M. 1997. Contrastive accent in a data-to- 
speech system. In Proceedings ACL/EACL I997. 
To appear. 
45 

