From Psycholinguistic Modelling of Interlanguage in Second 
Language Acquisition to a Computational Model 
Montse Maritxalar Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza Maite Oronoz 
Dept. of Computer Dept. of Computer Dept. of Computer 
Languages and Systems. Languages and Systems. Languages and Systems. 
Univ. of the Basque Country Univ. of the Basque Country Univ. of the Basque Country 
649 postakutxa 20080 649 postakutxa 20080 649 postakutxa 20080 
Donostia. Spain Donostia. Spain Donostia. Spain 
j ipmaanm~si, ehu. es j ipdisaa@si, ehu. es j iboranm?si, ehu. es 
Abst rac t  
The present article demostrates the im- 
plementation of a psycholinguistic model 
of second language learners' interlanguage 
in an Intelligent Computer Assisted Lan- 
guage Learning (ICALL) system for study- 
ing second language acquisition. We have 
focused our work on the common interlan- 
guage structures of students at the same 
language level. The Interlanguage Level 
Model (ILM) is made up of these struc- 
tures. 
In this paper we explain the conceptual 
model of ILMs, we present he experimen- 
tal method followed for collecting written 
materiM, we describe the output of the 
modelling tool, and finally some conclu- 
sions and future work are outlined. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The main goal of this article is to show the imple- 
mentation of a psycholinguistic model of second lan- 
guage learners' interlanguage in an Intelligent Com- 
puter Assisted Language Learning (ICALL) sys- 
tem for studying second language acquisition. The 
ICALL system, and the computational model for 
representing interlanguage, have been designed after 
previous work on psycholinguistics, artificial intelli- 
gence, and computational linguistics. This article 
will be focused on the computational model of inter- 
language. Description of the ICALL system can be 
found in (Maritxalar et al, 1994). 
The concepts transitional dialects (Corder, 1971) 
and approximate systems (Nemser, 1971) are pre- 
cursors to interlanguage (Selinker, 1972) (Selinker, 
1992). Their aim was to define communicative and 
grammatical competence in second languages. All 
of them have these common features: a) a student's 
discourse is independent  f rom the nat ive lan- 
guage (L1) and the target language (L2) and 
it is the product of a structured l inguistic sys- 
tem; b) the linguistic system is var iable during the 
learning process and it is very  similar in students  
of the same language level, with the exception of 
some differences, results of a person's learning expe- 
rience. In our case, the above mentioned character- 
istics are the basis for modelling the interlanguage. 
For example, as the linguistic system is very simi- 
lar in students of the same level, we can infer that 
we will have an interlanguage model for each level. 
Therefore, in our ICALL system we find a mod- 
ule where the different Interlanguage Level Models 
(ILMs) of each language level are represented. Rep- 
resentation of the ILMs will be presented in this ar- 
ticle. 
Our work is based on corpus analysis. At this 
moment we have focused on the implementation f 
the morphological nd morphosyntactic competence 
at word level. Work at word level is important in 
our case because Basque is an agglutinative lan- 
guage with rich morphosyntactic information within 
words. We have studied texts written by Spanish 
students of Basque. We are aware of the limits of 
the modelling only taking into account written ma- 
terial. Spoken material could also be collected for 
a better modelling. However, as the computational 
tools we have for studying Basque are only for writ- 
ing studies, we have discarded the treatment of the 
spoken output of the learners. 
In the next section we will explain the concep- 
tual model of ILMs by means of the KADS Domain 
Description Language (DDL) proposed in Schreiber 
(Schreiber et al, 1993). Next, we will give an idea 
of the experimental method used in order to col- 
lect written material and the top-down methodology 
used in order to model interlanguage in support of 
the selected corpora. After that, we will describe 
some of the implemented tools for modelling ILMs. 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza ~ Maite Oronoz 50 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
Montse Maritxalar, Arantza Dfaz de llarraza and Make Oronoz (1997) From Psycholingulstic Modelling of 
Interlanguage in Second Language Acquisition to a Computational Model. In T.M. Ellison (ed.) CoNLL97: 
Computational Natural Language Learning, ACL pp 50-59. 
{~) 1997 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Then, we will describe the output of the modelling 
tool, in order to compare the information given by 
the computational tool and the conceptual model 
of ILMs proposed before. Finally, some conclusions 
and future work are presented. 
2 A Conceptual  Model  for 
Interlanguage Level Models 
In this section we show the psycholinguistic model 
for Interlanguage Level Models (ILMs). The ILMs 
characterise different grammars of the interlanguage 
the ideal learner can have for the second language 
at each language level. It must be noted that, al- 
though some linguistic structures are particular to 
each student, others are common to all students at 
the same level. These common structures are those 
which will be represented in the ILMs. 
We represent ILMs by means of two different ypes 
of sequences of models: consecutive sequences and 
embodied sequences. For each level, two different 
kinds of knowledge are represented: the variable 
knowledge, the knowledge the student is supposed to 
be learning; and, the fixed knowledge, the knowledge 
the learner has already acquired. The knowledge the 
language learners have acquired at a concrete level 
includes the knowledge acquired at previous levels. 
However, the knowledge they are learning at each 
level follows a different structure: each model from 
each level is independent from other levels, although 
intersections between knowledge at different levels 
tan occur at times. The set of different variable 
language structures at each language level consists 
of consecutive sequences of models, while the set of 
fixed ones consists of embodied sequences (see Fig. 
1). When we say fixed knowledge or variable knowl- 
edge we refer to the language structures the learners 
have in their interlanguage, without making any dis- 
tinction between the representation of correct and 
"incorrect" structures. When we specify interlan- 
guage all the language structures, right and "de- 
viant", are represented in the same way. It must be 
noted that while a language structure used by high 
level learners can be considered eviant, the same 
structure in the case of beginners could be seen as 
correct at their level. For example a deviation at 
10th level like avoiding the word ote 'could' (i.e. nor 
da? 'who is?' instead of nor ore da? 'who could 
be?' ) is not considered a deviation in lower levels 
of the language. 
Language structures of the interlanguage are 
context-dependent (Selinker, 1992). Language 
learners create discourse domains as contexts for 
interlanguage development. 
c L lg 
? e ? 
Fig 1. ~tw~ct ioa  d ~ l  l.n te fla ngmlge ~dd ef X from X* L 
Such domains are constructed in connection with 
life experiences that have importance for the learner, 
containing prototypical interlanguage forms associ- 
ated with the content area by the learner. Interlan- 
guage may be developing in one domain while at the 
same time it may be stabilised, or possibly fossilised, 
in another (Selinker, 1992). So, language structures 
of the interlanguage include information about con- 
text where they appear. Some structures appear in 
the interlanguage in specific contexts, however, oth- 
ers appear in any context. That is why we can see, 
in the representation below that structures can be 
context-dependent or context-independent. A first 
approximation of the representation (using DDL) for 
the ILMs is as follows: 
s t ruc ture  Interlanguage_Level_Models; 
parts:  
models: 
set ( inst ance(Interlanguage._Level_Model)); 
s t ruc ture  Interlanguage_LeveLModel; 
parts :  
fixed_knowledge: 
set ( ins tance( in ter language_xnode l ) ) ;  
card ina l i ty :  
rain 0 max HIGHEST_LEVEL; 
variable_knowledge: 
set ( instance(interlanguage_model));  
card ina l i ty :  
rain 0 max HIGHEST._LEVEL; 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza ~J Maite Oronoz 51 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
s t ruc ture  interlanguage_model; 
parts: 
structure_context_indep : 
set( instance 
(interlanguage_structure_context_indep)); 
strueture_context_dep : 
set( instance 
(interlanguage_structure_context_dep)); 
propert ies: 
language_level: 
integer-range(I ,  HIGHEST.LEVEL); 
structure 
interlanguage_structure_context_indep ; 
subtype-of: interlanguage_structure, 
s t ructure interlanguage_structure_context_dep; 
subtype-of: interlanguage_structure, 
s t ructure  interlanguage_structure; 
subtypes: 
interlanguage_strueture_context _i d p,
interlanguage_structure_context _dep; 
parts: 
phenomena: 
set ( instance (linguistic_phenomenon)); 
conditions: 
set ( instance (interlanguage_condition)); 
properties: 
description: string; 
eontextualization: boolean; 
deviation: boolean; 
stabilization: 
function(stabilization of the rules 
associated to each phenomenon); 
ax ioms:  
If contextualization= False 
then conditions=<>. 
The same interlanguage structure can be 
deviation=True at the X language l vel 
and deviation=False at the Y language l vel. 
The value of stabilization is 
{rarely, sometimes, usually, always} 
The interlanguage structures we propose are com- 
posed of linguistic phenomena which occur under 
some conditions. The properties of the interlanguage 
structures are: description of the structure; contex- 
tualization, that is, context dependent orcontext in- 
dependent; deviation, which marks if the structure 
must be considered eviant at the related language 
level and, finally, stabilization. 
The stabilization property is a qualitative value 
VARIABLE 
KNOWLEDGE 
/ \ Stabilization 
\ 
FIXED 
KNOWLEDGE 
Fig 2. Interlanguage. 
which represents the acquisition level of the struc- 
ture for a particular language l vel. It is by means 
of this property that a language structure inside the 
student's interlanguage is considered fixed knowl- 
edge or variable knowledge. When the value of 
the stabilization property is always it means that 
the language structure has been assimilated by the 
learner and in the future it would be quite difficult 
making some changes. However, when the value is 
rarely, there is a high variability of the language 
structure, and, therefore, a good teacher (could be 
an ICALL system) should be able to help the learner 
to take away those structures in case they would not 
direct the student owards a target language. 
In the first approximation f the representation for
the ILMs we have represented interlanguage struc- 
tures as a set of linguistic phenomena depending on 
interlanguage conditions. Now, we will explain those 
conditions, and, we will also describe the definition 
of linguistic rules and replacements which define the 
linguistic phenomena. 
st ructure linguistic_phenomenon; 
parts: 
rules: 
set  ( instance (linguistic_rule)) 
I set (tuple(replacement-rule); 
properties: 
type: 
function(type ofthe rules or replacements 
associated to each phenomenon) 
description: string; 
global: boolean; 
lexical_entry: set(instance(morpheme)); 
axioms: 
If global=False then lexical_entry = < > 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza 8J Maite Oronoz 52 Computational Model off Interlanguage 
s t ructure  interlanguage_condition; 
parts :  
linguistic_context: 
set (instance(linguistic_condition)); 
non_linguistic_context: 
set (instance(non.linguistic_condition)); 
Which kind of conditions must be considered in 
the interlanguage? We said above that, inside 
the interlanguage, language structures are context- 
dependent or context-independent (Selinker, 1992). 
Referring to context-dependent structures it is very 
important to differentiate between two types of con- 
texts: non-linguistic and linguistic. 
Non-linguistic onditions are related to a discourse 
domain. Interlanguage varies depending on the do- 
main. The linguistic structures that we activate 
when writing a story are different o those we ac- 
tivate when we write scientific-technical texts (the- 
matic_conditions). Activity types, such as fielding 
questions, writing a letter, translating a sentence, 
conversing in a group etc. are also non-linguistic 
conditions. 
Interlanguage forms can vary from one activity 
type to another, even though the discourse domain 
is the same. The activity types can be related to 
the structure of the whole text (text_conditions); 
in addition there are also some non-linguistic on- 
ditions (e.g. length of the sentence) related to 
a particular language structure in the text (struc- 
ture_conditions). For example, sometimes students 
mark agreement between verb and complements in
small simple sentences, and, at the same time they 
forget it in long sentences. In our case, structure 
conditions are studied by means of the corpus; text 
conditions, however, are detected by means of inter- 
views with the teachers and learners. 
concept  condition; 
subtypes :  
linguistic_condition, on_linguistic_condition; 
p roper t ies :  
description: str ing;  
concept  linguistic_condition; 
subtype-o f :  condition; 
p roper t ies :  
word_level: 
l lst (part_of_speech, declension_case ... ) 
sentence_level: l ist (use_of_subordinates .. .  ) 
concept  non_linguistic_condition; 
subtype-o f :  condition; 
subtypes :  
textual_condition, thematic_condition; 
concept  textual_condition 
subtype-o f :  non_linguistic_condition; 
p roper t ies :  
text_conditions: 
l ist (summary, formalJetter, 
translation .. .  ); 
structure_conditions: 
list(long_sentence_based, long_word_based, 
apl_place_lem, apl_place_mor .. .  ); 
concept  thematic_condition 
subtype-o f :  non_linguistic_condition; 
p roper t ies :  
type: (general, technical); 
Linguistic conditions are studied by means of a 
corpus. In the corpus composed of texts written 
by high level and upper intermediate language 
students (350 texts collected between 1991 and 
1995) we found linguistic influence in some language 
structures of the interlanguage. For instance, the 
presence of plurality of some components in the 
sentence can cause verbs to agree with such compo- 
nents, whether or not these must be in agreement 
with the verb (the phenomenon of plurality has 
also been observed in second language learners of 
French (Lessard et al, 1994)). Finally, we would 
like to claim that this way of putting linguistic 
structures in context could be applied similarly 
when modelling first languages. 
After defining which kind of conditions must be 
taken into account when linguistiq phenomena re 
identified, we will see which type of linguistic rules 
can be found inside the phenomena. 
It is usual that language learners know only some 
linguistic rules corresponding to a particular linguis- 
tic phenomenon, and not all of them. In the case of 
language natives, however, they know, in most cases, 
all linguistic rules. That is the reason for represent- 
ing explicitly in the student's interlanguage the set 
of linguistic rules related to the linguistic phenom- 
ena of the language structure. In other cases, as 
in natives, it should not be necessary to make their 
linguistic rules explicit as the linguistic phenomena 
define, implicitly, the set of linguistic rules. 
In the same way, we could say that linguistic rules 
identify the corresponding linguistic phenomenon, 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza ~ Maite Oronoz 53 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
however, it is necessary to make it explicit, as a 
linguistic phenomenon could be detected in a stu- 
dent's interlanguage, but the linguistic rules would 
not be identified until after some interactions with 
the student. The student model is dynamic, so, the 
language structures are also dynamic. Therefore, in 
the first interactions with the student a linguistic 
phenomenon can be detected inside the student's 
interlanguage before eliciting the corresponding 
linguistic rules. Next we shall define the structure 
of the linguistic rules. 
s t ruc ture  linguistic_rule; 
subtypes :  morphological_rule, syntactic_rule; 
parts:  
implemented_by: set (rule. identifier); 
cardinality: rain 1; 
conditions: set ( ins tance 
(interlanguage_condition)); 
propert ies :  
type: {morph, syn}; 
description: str ing;  
example: str ing;  
stabilization: 
{rarely, sometimes, usually, always}; 
In the experiments the teachers have identified 
three types of language phenomena in the students' 
interlanguage: first, simple interlanguage structures 
composed of a set of linguistic phenomena and lin- 
guistic rules; second, avoiding interlanguage struc- 
tures defined as linguistic rules that the student usu- 
ally avoids; and, third, replacement language struc- 
tures where the learner uses a structure too often 
(or rarely) instead of using other structures (e.g. 
when a person uses the conjunction and all time and 
rarely uses structures such as however, nevertheless, 
thus ... ). Consequently, we can say that there 
are relationships between linguistic rules of the in- 
terlanguage. That is why structures which represent 
linguistic phenomena also have a set of replacement 
tuples, which represent the replacement relations be- 
tween linguistic rules. 
3 Using Corpus Linguistics in order 
to Model Interlanguage 
In this section we will explain first the experimen- 
tal method used in order to collect written material, 
and second the top-down methodology used in or- 
der to model interlanguage in support of the selected 
corpora. We model Interlanguage Level Models by 
means of automatic tools which use the collected 
material as input. It must be noted that some in- 
formation of the interlanguage models, for example 
text conditions (see section 2), are detected semiau- 
tomatically with the help of the teachers and learn- 
ers. 
Before explaining modelling based on corpus anal- 
ysis, we would like to make some comments about 
the criteria for defining the corpus: we collected 
written material from different language schools 
(IRALE 1, ILAZKI) and grouped this material de- 
pending on some features of the texts such as, 1) 
the kind of exercise proposed by the teacher (e.g. 
abstract, article about a subject, letter . . . )  and 
2) the student who wrote the text. Those are stu- 
dents with a regular attendance in classes and with 
different characteristics and motivations for learning 
Basque (e.g. different learning rates, different knowl- 
edge about other languages, mother tongue . .. ). 
We codified the texts of the corpora following a 
prefixed notation (e.g. ill0as) showing the language 
school (e.g. il, ILAZKI), the language level, the 
learner's code, and the type of exercise proposed 
(e.g. s, summary). The last feature is what we 
have called text condition in section 2. At the same 
time, a database for gathering the relevant informa- 
tion about the students' learning process was de- 
veloped. We retrieved such information from inter- 
views with the students and the teachers (Andueza 
et al, 1996). The corpus collected from 1990 to 1995 
is made up of 350 texts. This corpus has been di- 
vided in subsets depending on the language level. At 
the moment we have defined three language levels of 
study that we call low, intermediate, and high levels. 
Before designing and implementing the automatic 
tools, three different studies of corpora during 90/91 
(i.e. 50 texts semiautomatically analysed), 93/94 
(i.e. 20 texts semiautomatically analysed), and 
94/95 (i.e. 100 texts semiautomatically analysed) 
were carried out. These studies were done, in the 
first case, by teachers who didn't know the students, 
and in the other two cases by teachers who knew the 
students. In the first two cases the work lasted two 
months. In the third case, however, texts were col- 
lected every week from September until June, and 
two teachers worked five hours per week on study- 
ing the corpora during the 94/95 academic year. 
The language learners had five hours of language 
classes per week, and they wrote one composition 
every week or every fortnight. 
For modelling interlanguage at different language 
levels we use a top-down methodology, that is, we 
start from the modelling of high levels and con- 
tinue to lower ones (see Fig 1). The reasons for 
11RALE and ILAZKI: schools pecialised in the teach- 
ing of Basque 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza ~ Maite Oronoz 54 Computational Model off Interlanguage 
a top-down methodology are that most computa- 
tional tools for Basque we have (lemmatiser, spelling 
checker-corrector, morphological disambiguator.. .  ) 
can be easily adapted for high language levels; be- 
sides, usually computational tools for analysing writ- 
ten texts of high language levels are more robust 
than those of low levels and, finally, there usually 
is more written material at high levels than at low 
ones. 
We have automat ica l ly  analysed subsets of cor- 
pora in intermediate and high levels. Choosing a 
text as a unit of study, groups of sixteen texts have 
been deeply and automatically studied. 
The steps we followed using the tools we have 
adapted in order to build the interlanguage model 
for each N language level were: 
i. Design of the lexical database for the Nth lan- 
guage level. 
2. Selection of the corpus (CORPUS-N) and sub- 
sets of CORPUS-N to be used in the next steps. 
This selection is based on the criteria, explained 
before, for collecting material. 
3. Definition of the morphology and morphosyntax 
based on a subset of CORPUS-N. 
4. Identification of the fixed knowledge and the 
variable knowledge, considering the contexts de- 
fined in section 2. 
(a) Evaluation of the reliability of the model 
using other subsets of CORPUS-N. 
(b) Evaluation of the results by a language 
teacher of N level. 
For example, in studies of high language mod- 
elling, a teacher evaluated the results at word level, 
that is, the type of rules detected and the contexts 
where they were applied. The evaluation was suc- 
cessful, even though in some cases the perception of 
the teacher was not the same as the results inferred 
from the automatic study of the corpora (e.g. in the 
opinion of the teacher the students are used to delet- 
ing the h letter more usually than adding it. This 
phenomenon has not been detected in the results of 
the corpus). 
4 Implementation 
We have adapted tools previously developed in our 
computational linguistic group during the last ten 
years. These tools are: the Lexical Database for 
Basque (EDBL) (Agirre et al, 1994), the morpho- 
logical analyser based on the Two-Level Morphology 
(Agirre et al, 1992), the lemmatiser (Aldezabal et 
al., 1994) and some parts of the Constraint Gram- 
mar for Basque (Alegria et al, 1996) (Karlsson et 
hi., 1995). 
We have two main reasons for adapting these 
tools: 
. Some of the deviant linguistic structures used 
by second language learners are different to 
those native Basque speakers use. The context 
of application, i.e. structure conditions at word 
level of some rules, are not the same in both 
cases. Moreover, we need to add some new rules 
to have one rule for each linguistic structure, 
and we also need some of these rules in order to 
detect deviant linguistic phenomena, e.g. loan 
words from Spanish (see section 4.1). 
. In the original tools, the context of application 
of the rules remained ambiguous. As we ex- 
plained in section 2, the context of application 
is important o us for modelling the grammat- 
ical competence of the students, so we disam- 
biguate such contexts by means of our adapted 
tools (see section 4.2). In the figure below we 
can see a scheme of the way in which we have 
used these adapted tools (Diaz et al, 1997): 
ANALYS IS  
AND 
CONTEXT DETECT ION 
Learner saalyselt + P ,~ocess  
D ISAMBIGUATION 
La~ttet lemrmliser ?
Language Lavel Based Disambiguato~ ? 
Context Based Disambiguator INTERLANGUAGE 
1HODI~S 
Fig 3. Modelling Process. 
LEARNER ANALYSER = The adapted morpho- 
logical analyser (detection of structural contexts). 
POSTPROCESS = Context detection tool (detec- 
tion of structural contexts and linguistic contexts). 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza 8J Maite Oronoz 55 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
LEARNER LEMMATISER = The adapted lem- 
matiser. 
LANGUAGE LEVEL BASED DISAMBIGUA- 
TOR = Disambiguator for each language level 
(Based on the number of rules in each interpreta- 
tion). 
CONTEXT BASED DISAMBIGUATOR = Dis- 
ambiguator for each language level. 
(Based on subsets of the Constraint Grammar for 
Basque + disambiguation rules based on the context 
of application). 
INTERLANGUAGE MODELS = In ter lan -  
guage Level  Mode ls  ( ILMs)  
4.1 Redesigning the automata 
As we said above, the original morphological nal- 
yser was based on the Two-Level Morphology. The 
implementation of the morphophonological rules 
were made by the automata. In the original anal- 
yser we had 30 automata: 11 of them were used 
for analysing standard words, but their activation 
was never detected; the other 19 which represented 
a deviation were identified but the type of deviation 
remained unknown. Moreover, the context of appli- 
cation remained ambiguous. 
In the adapted analyser we find 59 automata, 
which represent 59 different types of phenomena 
(these are codified as we can see in the table below). 
We have modified the automata of the morphological 
analyser in order to detect which rules have been ap- 
plied and the contexts (structure conditions) where 
they have been activated. We have also made some 
changes in the module of the analyser which recog- 
nised the automata. The number of automata has 
increased ue to the addition of new rules for de- 
tecting new deviations of language learners and to 
the division of some original automata in others that 
detect, in a more specific way, some morphologicM 
phenomena which are very interesting for the study 
of second language acquisition. An example will il- 
lustrate this fact: 
Rules in the original analyser 
h:0 => R:= (+:=)+ _ 
(Rule for standard phenomenon) 
h :0=> IV :V - - (0 : * )  : \ ] _V :V  
(Rule for deviant phenomenon) 
The application of the rule for standard phe- 
nomenon is not detected, however, the competence 
error represented in the rule for deviant phenomenon 
is identified even though the context of application 
remains ambiguous\] 
Rules in the adapted analyser 
h:0 => R:= (+:=)+ _ 
(LEDEH: Delete the H LEtter at the End of 
the root) 
h:0 => V:V _ V:V 
i(LEDAH: Delete the H LEtter Anywhere in 
the word) 
h:0 => (0:*) : _ V:V 
(LEDBH: Delete the H LEtter at the Beginning 
of the root) 
All three rules of the interlanguage and the con- 
text of application are detected when they have been 
activated. We repeat he same automata three times 
and mark as negative in each automaton the states 
which correspond to the activation of the rule.\] 
4.2 Ru les  in the i r  Linguistic Context 
Experiments and interviews with experts lead us 
to see the need of identifying the linguistic context 
where a morphological rule (for standard or deviant 
phenomenon) is applied. We identify this context 
by adding to the adapted morphological analyser 
(Learner_Analyser) some characteristics such as the 
place (lemma/morpheme) where the rule is applied, 
the length of the word and the type of the last letter 
(vowel/consonant) of the root (Postprocess). 
We have two main aims in mind: 
1. Disambiguate unlikely interpretations of a word 
(Context..Based_Disambiguator). 
There are two ways to do this: 
* Discarding interpretations in which a mor- 
phological rule has been applied in a part of 
the word (lemma/morpheme) where it never ap- 
pear in real life examples. For example, the 
deviant word *analisis has two interpretations 
(analisi/analisiz): the rule to add an s at the 
end of the lemma / the replacement of z by s 
in the morpheme. The second interpretation is 
not possible for high language level students, so 
we discard it at such level. 
* Discarding interpretations in which a morpho- 
logical rule is applied within an unusual part of 
speech. The rule that detects the replacement 
of t by d is a good example of this. The rule is 
never used in verbs starting with d. After dis- 
carding all interpretations of the words, where 
the replacement rule has been applied and the 
part of speech is a verb, the number of interpre- 
tations in the analysis of the word is reduced to 
a half. 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza ~ Maite Oronoz 56 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
2. Refine the model of the student's Interlanguage 
(Language_Level_Based_Disambiguator). 
A word changes into another one quite differ- 
ent as a result of the application of an excessive 
number of rules who represent deviant phenom- 
ena. From the study of the corpora, we can de- 
termine the exact number of possible deviation 
rules for an interpretation that makes ense at 
each language level. At the moment, we have 
determined it for some levels (i.e. the highest) 
and we are working on the others. 
5 The Output of the Modelling Tool 
In this section we will show an example of an inter- 
language structure in order to see the relationship 
between the output of the modelling tool and the 
description of interlanguage structures explained in 
the conceptual model. 
In this example we will see a detected linguistic 
phenomenon in the corpus of high level learners. The 
description of the phenomenon is: "when learners 
want to construct relative clauses and the last letter 
of the verb is t, for example dut (auxiliary verb for 
composed verbs), when adding the suffix -.._n for con- 
structing relative clauses, the t is replaced by d and 
the a letter is added. That is, dut + -n = dudan". 
e.g. Ikusi dudan haurra atsegina da. 'The boy 
who I have seen is nice.' 
Ikusi duda_n haurra atsegina da. 
I have seen who boy the nice is. 
This example shows that Basque syntactic infor- 
mation is found inside the word. That is why in 
the modelling of the LC_I linguistic condition (see 
the example) the REL feature (relative clause) is at 
word level, and not at sentence l vel. 
An example of the output of the modelling tool: 
(interlanguage_structure IE_i 
(phenomena (LF_i)) 
(conditions (LC_i TC_3)) 
(description ?) 
(contextualization True) 
(deviation False) 
(stabilization usually)) 
(linguistic_phenomenon LF_I
(rules (LEAIA_i LERATDI_i)) 
(type (morph)) 
(description ?) 
(global False) 
(lexical_entry <>)) 
(linguistic_rule LEAIA_i 
(implemented_by (9)) 
(conditions (LC_I TC_I TC_3)) 
(type morph) 
(description 
"Add the A LEtter Inside the word" 
(example " dudan ") 
(stabilization usually)) 
(linguistic_rule LERATDi_I 
(implemented.by (8)) 
(conditions ( LC_I TC_2 TC_3)) 
(type morph) 
(description 
"Replace T by D Anywhere in the word") 
(example "dudan") 
(stabilization usually)) 
(textual_condition TC_i 
(text_conditions <>) 
(structure_conditions (apl_place_mor)) 
(description 
"rule applied in the morpheme")) 
(textual_condition TC_3 
(text_conditions <>) 
(structure_conditions (end_word_t)) 
(description "the last letter of the word is t")) 
(linguistic_condition LC_i 
(wordAevel (V REL)) 
(sentence_level <>) 
(description "verb for relative clause")) 
(textual_condition TC_2 
(text_conditions <:>) 
(structure_conditions (apl_placeAem)) 
(description "rule applied in the lemma")) 
Martxalar, DCaz de Ilarraza ~ Maite Oronoz 57 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
In the process of modelling, first, we identify the 
linguistic rules, second, we detect groups of linguistic 
rules which occur in the same context and define the 
linguistic phenomenon, and last, the interlanguage 
structure is identified. 
If we compare this output with the conceptual 
model given in section 2, we can see how the in- 
formation eeded is reached automatically, except 
the description of the linguistic phenomenon a d the 
interlanguage structure (see question marks in the 
example). Such information will be completed by 
the psycholinguist who will use the ICALL system. 
The information given by the psycholinguist will be 
reused in future modellings. 
6 Conc lus ions  and  Future  Work  
The presented work proves that the implementation 
of psycholinguistic models of interlanguage is viable 
from the adaptation of the linguistic-computational 
tools we have for the automatic study of Basque. 
Modelling at word level is important in our case be- 
cause Basque is an agglutinative language with rich 
morphosyntactic information within words. 
The results obtained using the developed tools for 
language learning studies provide us statistical in- 
formation about phenomena that teachers and psy- 
cholinguistics knew by intuition. Therefore, we can 
say that corpus analysis is a good technique for mod- 
elling ILMs. 
In the near future we will develop new tools in or- 
der to model each student's knowledge. The detec- 
tion of contexts will be improved in order to identify 
contexts related to the characteristics of the particu- 
lar learners. Moreover we will work on the detection 
of interlanguage structures at sentence l vel . Field 
studies have been carried out in this sense (Mar- 
itxalar et al, 1993) (Andueza et al, 1996). At the 
moment, we are studying some aspects of the mor- 
phosyntax and syntax for L2, taking as a basis the 
results obtained in Andueza (Andueza et al, 1996), 
where in a final test the hypothesis obtained in the 
study carried out in the 94/95 academic year were 
contrasted with the students. In this work, we also 
analysed the reasons for using some language struc- 
tures in addition to the detection of their context. 
We plan in the future to add to the system such 
knowledge about he diagnosis of structures. 
Finally, we would like to remark that together 
with the experiments explained in the article, two 
environments are being prepared in the ICALL sys- 
tem: the Knowledge Acquisition Subsystem and the 
Learning Process Subsystem. The Knowledge Ac- 
quisition Subsystem helps language t achers to make 
hypotheses about, among others, the reasons tu- 
dents have for using deviant language structures. 
The Learning Process Subsystem guides users in 
their learning process giving hints according to their 
language l vel. 
7 Acknowledgements  
This work is being developed in the framework of 
a research project sponsored by the University of 
the Basque Country and the Government of the 
Province of Gipuzkoa. The authors would like to 
thank both Institutions. 
Re ferences  
Eneko Agirre, Ifiaki Alegria, Xabier Arregi, Xa- 
bier Artola, Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Montse 
Maritxalar, Kepa Sarasola nd Miriam Urkia. 
1992. XUXEN: A spelling checker/corrector 
for Basque based on Two-Level Morphol- 
ogy. In Proceedings off the Third Conference 
ANLP(ACL), pages 119-125, Trento, Italy. 
Eneko Agirre, Xabier Arregi, Jose Mari Arriola, Xa- 
bier Artola and Jon Mikel Insausti. 1994. Eu- 
skararen Datu-Base Lexikala (EDBL) Internal 
Report. UPV/EHU/LSI/TR 8-94, Computer 
Science Faculty: University of the Basque 
Country. 
Izaskun Aldezabal, Ifiaki Alegria, Xabier Artola, 
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Nerea Ezeiza, Koldo 
Gojenola, Itziar Aduriz and Miriam Urkia. 
1994. EUSLEM: Un lematizador/etiquetador 
de textos en euskara. In Proceedings of the X. 
Conference SEPLN, C6rdoba, Spain. 
Ifiaki Alegria, Jose Mari Arriola, Xabier Artola, 
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Koldo Gojenola, 
Montse Maritxalar and Itziar Aduriz. 1996. A 
Corpus-Based Morphological Disambiguation 
Tool for Basque. In Proceedings of the XII. 
Conference SEPLN, Sevilla, Spain. 
A. Andueza, Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Montse Mar- 
itxalar, Josune Martiarena nd Ifiaki Pikabea. 
1996. Hizkuntza baten Ikaskuntza Prozesuari 
buruzko landa lana. Sistema Informatiko adi- 
mendun baten oinarria. In Internal Report. 
UPV/EHU/LSI/TR 8-96, Computer Science 
Faculty: University of the Basque Country. 
S. Bull. 1994. Student Modelling for Second Lan- 
guage Acquisition. In Computers 8J Education 
23, pages 13-20. 
Martxalar, Diaz de Ilarraza 8J Maite Oronoz 58 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
! 
S. Corder. 1971. Idiosyncratic dialects and error 
analysis. In International Review of Applied 
Linguistics 9, pages 147-159. 
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Montse Maritxalar and 
Maite Oronoz. 1997. Reusability of Language 
Technology in support of Corpus Studies in 
an CALL Environment. In Language Teaching 
and Language Technology Conference, Gronin- 
gen, The Netherlands. 
F. Karlsson, A. Voutilainen, J. Heikkil/i and A. 
Anttila. 1995.  Constraint Grammar: a 
language-independent sys em for parsing un- 
restricted text. Mouton de Gruyter. 
G. Lessard, D. Maher and I. Tomek. 1994. Mod- 
elling Second Language Learner Creativity. In 
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 
5(4)., pages 455-480. 
Montse Maritxalar and Arantza Dfaz de Ilarraza. 
1993. Integration of Natural Language Tech- 
niques in the ICALL Systems Field: The treat- 
ment of incorrect knowledge. In Internal Re- 
port. UP V/EHU/LSI/TR 9-93, Computer Sci- 
ence Faculty: University of the Basque Coun- 
try. 
Montse Maritxalar and Arantza Dfaz de Ilarraza. 
1994. An ICALL System for Studying the 
Learning Process. In Computers in Applied 
Linguistics Conference. Iowa State University. 
Montse Maritxalar and Arantza Dfaz de Ilar- 
raza. 1996a. Hizkuntza baten Ikaskuntza- 
Prozesuan zeharreko Tartehizkuntz Osaketa: 
Sistema Informatiko baten Diseinurako Azter- 
keta Psikolinguistikoa. In Internal Report. 
UPV/EHU/LSI/TR 7-96, Computer Science 
Faculty: University of the Basque Country. 
Montse Maritxalar and Arantza Dfaz de Ilarraza. 
1996b. Modelizaci6n de la Competencia Gra- 
matical en la Interlengua basada en el An?1isis 
de Corpus. In Proceedings of the XII. Confer- 
ence SEPLN, Sevilla, Spain. 
W. Nemser. 1971. Approximate Systems of Foreign 
Language Learners. In International Review of 
Applied Linguistics 9, pages 115-123. 
G. Schreiber, B. Wielinga and J. Breuker. 1993. 
KADS: A Principled Approach to Knowledge- 
Based System Development. Academic Press. 
L. Selinker. 1972. Interlanguage In International 
Review of Applied Linguistics 10., pages 209- 
231. 
L. Selinker. 1992. Rediscovering interlanguage. Lon- 
don:Longman. 
Martxalar~ Dfaz de Harraza ~ Maite Oronoz 59 Computational Model of Interlanguage 
