Towards Generation of Fluent Referring Act ion 
in Mult imodal  Situations 
Tsuneak i  Kato  
NTT  Information and 
Communicat ion  Systems Labs. 
Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239, JAPAN 
kat o?nttnly, isl. ntt. co. jp 
Yuk iko  I. Nakano  
NTT  Informat ion and 
Communicat ion  Systems Labs. 
Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239, JAPAN 
yukiko?nttnly, isl. ntt. co. jp 
Abst ract  
Referring actions in multimodal situations 
can be thought of as linguistic expressions 
well coordinated with several physical ac- 
tions. In this paper, what patterns of lin- 
guistic expressions are commonly used and 
how physical actions are temporally coordi- 
nated to them are reported based on corpus 
examinations. In particular, by categoriz- 
ing objects according to two features, visi- 
bility and membership, the schematic pat- 
terns of referring expressions are derived. 
The difference between the occurrence fre- 
quencies of those patterns in a multimodal 
situation and a spoken-mode situation ex- 
plains the findings of our previous research. 
Implementation based on these results is on 
going. 
1 In t roduct ion  
A lot of active studies have been conducted on the 
temporal coordination of natural language and vi- 
sual information. The visual information considered 
includes pointing gestures (Andrd & Rist, 1996), fa- 
cial expressions and iconic gestures (Cassell et al, 
1994), and graphical effects uch as highlighting and 
blinking (Dalal et al, 1996; Feiner et ah, 1993). 
Among those we have been focusing on generat- 
ing effective xplanations by using natural anguage 
temporally coordinated with pictures and gestures. 
The experimental system we implemented is for ex- 
plaining the installation and operation of a telephone 
with an answering machine feature, and simulates 
instruction dialogues performed by an expert in a 
face-to-face situation with a telephone in front of her 
(Kato et al, 1996). The system explains by using 
synthesized speech coordinated with pointing ges- 
tures from a caricatured agent and simulated opera- 
tions implemented by the switching of figures. One 
of the important issues for enhancing this type of 
system is to shed light on what makes referring ac- 
tions fluent in multimodal situations and to build a 
mechanism to generate such fluent actions. 
We also empirically investigated how communica- 
tive modes influence the content and style of re- 
ferring actions made in dialogues (Kato & Nakano, 
1995). Experiments were conducted to obtain a cor- 
pus consisting of human-to-human i struction di- 
alogues on telephone installation in two settings. 
One is a spoken-mode dialogue situation (SMD here- 
after), in which explanations are given using just 
voice. The other is a multimodal dialogue situation 
(MMD hereafter), in which both voice and visual in- 
formation, mainly the current state and outlook of 
the expert's telephone and her pointing gestures to 
it, can be communicated. Detailed analysis of the re- 
ferring actions observed in that corpus revealed the 
following two properties. 
P I :  The availability of pointing, communication 
through the visual channel reduces the amount 
of information conveyed through the speech or 
linguistic channel. In initial identification, the 
usage of linguistic expressions on shape/size, 
characters/marks, and related objects decreases 
in MMD, while the usage of position informa- 
tion does not decrease. 
P2: In SMD, referring actions tend to be realized to 
an explicit goal and divided into a series of fine- 
grained steps. The participants try to achieve 
them step by step with many confirmations. 
Although our findings were very suggestive for an- 
alyzing the properties of referring actions in multi- 
modal situations, they were still descriptive and not 
sufficient o allow their use in designing referring 
action generation mechanisms. Then, as the next 
step, we have been examining that corpus closer and 
trying to derive some schemata of referring actions, 
which would be useful for implementation of mul- 
timodal dialogue systems. This paper reports the 
results of these activities. 
Two short comments must be made to make our 
research standpoint clearer. First, our purpose is to 
generate referring actions that model human refer- 
ring actions in mundane situations. Theoretically 
speaking, as Appelt pointed out, it is enough for 
referring to provide sufficient description to distin- 
Towards Generation of Fluent Referring Action in Multimodal Situations 21 
guish one object from the other candidates (Appelt, 
1985). For example, a pointing action to the object 
must be enough, or description of the object's posi- 
tion, such as "the upper left button of the dial but- 
tons" also must be considered sufficient. However, 
we often observe referring actions that consist of a 
linguistic expression, "a small button with the mark 
of a handset above and to the left of the dial but- 
tons", accompanied with a pointing gesture. Such 
a referring action is familiar to us even though it is 
redundant from a theoretical viewpoint. Such famil- 
iar actions that the recipient does not perceive as 
awkward is called fluent in this paper. Our objec- 
tive is to generate such fluent referring actions, and 
is rather different from those of (Appelt, 1985) and 
(Dale & Haddock, 1991). 
Second, in our research, a referring action is con- 
sidered as the entire sequence of actions needed for 
allowing the addressee to identify the intended ob- 
ject and incorporating its achievement into part of 
the participants' hared knowledge. In order to refer 
to an object in a box, an imperative sentence such as 
"Open the box, and look inside" may be used. Such 
a request shifts the addressee's attention, and to see 
it as a part of the referring action may be problem- 
atic. It is, however, reasonable to think that both 
the request for looking into the box and the assertion 
of the fact that an object is in the box come from 
different plans for achieving the same goal, identify- 
ing the object. As Cohen claimed that it is useful 
to understand referring expressions from the view- 
point of speech act planning (Cohen, 1984), it is not 
so ridiculous to go one step further and to consider 
the entire sequence of actions, including attention 
shifts, as an instance of a plan for object referring. 
Moreover, this approach better suits implementing a 
referring action generation mechanism as a planner. 
The next section describes what kinds of linguistic 
expression are used for referring actions in MMD and 
compares them with those in SMD. In particular, by 
categorizing objects according to two features: visi- 
bility and membership, schemata for object referring 
expressions of each category are derived. In the third 
section, how several kinds of actions such as point- 
ing gestures are accompanied by such expressions i
reported. In the fourth section, implementation of
referring action generation is discussed based on our 
findings described thus far. Finally, in the last sec- 
tion, our findings are summarized and future work 
is discussed. 
2 Linguistic expression in referring 
actions 
Referring actions in multimodal situations can be 
thought of as linguistic expressions well coordinated 
with several physical actions. The linguistic expres- 
sions for referring to objects, referring expressions, 
are focused on in this section, and in the next sec- 
NIII i utt?n3 
III Butio:nl    I 
Button2 
Figure 1: The telephone used in the corpus 
tion, how those expressions should be coordinated 
with actions is discussed. 
2.1 Ob ject  categor i zat ion  
The top and left side views of the telephone used 
are shown in Fig. 1. Although the objects such as 
buttons can be identified by using several features 
such as position, color, shape, and size, the two fea- 
tures described below proved to be dominant in the 
referring expressions used. 
Visibi l i ty: Some objects are located on the side 
or back of the telephone, and can not be seen 
unless the body is turned over or looked into. 
Some objects lie underneath the cover, and 
opening that cover is needed in order to see 
them. Such objects are categorized into invis- 
ible ones and distinguished from visible ones, 
which are located on the top 1. 
Membersh ip :  Aligned buttons of the same shape 
and color are usually recognized as a group. 
Members of such a group are distinguished from 
isolated ones 2. 
In Fig. 1, socket 1 on the side is invisible and iso- 
lated, button 1 on the left of the top surface is visible 
and isolated, button 2 on the lower right of the top 
surface is a visible group member, and button 3 on 
the upper right is an invisible group member as it is 
underneath a cassette cover usually closed. 
According to this categorization, we determined 
which patterns of referring expressions were fre- 
quently observed for each type of object. The 
patterns thus extracted can be expected to yield 
tAs you have already realized, this feature is not in- 
trinsic to the object, but depends on the state of the 
telephone when the object is referred to. Buttons un- 
derneath the cover are visible when the cover is open. 
2The recognition of a group may differ among people. 
In daily life, however, we believe an effective level of 
consensus can be attained. 
22 T. Kato and Y.L Nakano 
schemata for referring expression generation. Three 
explanations of five experts in two situations, MMD 
and SMD, i.e. fifteen explanations in each situation, 
were analyzed. The apprentices differed with each 
explanation. Every referring expression analyzed in- 
volved initial identification, which is used to make 
the first effective reference to an object, and to in- 
troduce it into the explanation. All objects were 
referred to in the context in which the expert made 
the apprentice identify it and then requested that 
some action be performed on it. All explanations 
were done in Japanese 3.
2.2 Schemata  for re fer r ing  to v is ib le 
i so lated ob jec ts  
Referring actions to visible isolated objects are 
rather simple and were basic for all cases. Two ma- 
jor patterns were observed and can be treated as 
the schemata. Table 1 shows these two schemata 4, 
called RS1 and RS2 hereafter. RS1 contains two 
sentences. The first asserts the existence of the ob- 
ject at a described position. The second is an im- 
perative sentence for requesting that an action be 
performed on the object identified. In the first sen- 
tence, a postpositional phrase describing the object 
position precedes the object description. The object 
description is a noun phrase that has modifiers de- 
scribing features of the object such as its color or 
size followed by a head common noun describing the 
object category. That  is, its structure is 
\[object description np\] 
\[feature description pp/comp\]  *
\[object class name n\] 
In RS2,  the imperative sentence requesting an 
action contains a description referring to the ob- 
ject. This description has the same structure as RS1 
shown above. In most cases, the first feature descrip- 
tion is a description of the object position. In both 
schemata, object position is conveyed first, other fea- 
tures second, and the requested action follows. This 
order of information flow seems natural for identify- 
ing the object and then acting on it. Examples of 
referring expressions 5 that fit these schemata re 
3 Japanese is a head-final language. Complements and 
postpositional phrases on the left modify nouns or noun 
phrases on the right, and construct noun phrases. That 
is, a simphfied version of Japanese grammar contains 
pp --~ np p, np ~ pp rip, np --~ comp rip, and np ~ n. 
Sentences are constructed by a rule, s ~ pp* v. The or- 
der of pps is almost free syntactically, being determined 
by pragmatic onstraints. Older information precedes 
newer (Kuno, 1978). 
4Schemata re represented as sequences of terminal 
symbols, non terminal symbols each of those has a form 
of \[semantic content syntactic category\], and schema ID. 
A slash appearing in a syntactic ategory means options 
rather than a slash feature. 
tAll examples are basically extracted from the corpus 
examined. Those, however, were slightly modified by 
(1) daiarubotan no hidariue ni juwaki no 
dial-buttons upper-left LOC handset 
maaku ga tsuita chiisai botan 
mark SUBJ being-placed-on small button 
ga arimasu, sore wo oshi tekudasai. 
SUBJ exist, it OBJ push REQUEST 
'On the upper left of the dial buttons, there is a 
small button with the mark of a handset. Please 
push it.' 
(2) daiarubotan o hidariue nojuwaki no maaku 
dial-buttons upper-left handset mark 
ga tsuita chiisai botan wo oshi 
SUBJ being-placed-on small button OBJ push 
tekudasai. 
REQUEST 
'Please push the small button with the mark of 
a handset on the upper left of the dial buttons.' 
In RS1,  the achievement of identification is con- 
firmed by making the first sentence a tag question 
or putting a phrase for confirmation after that sen- 
tence. Sometimes it is implicitly confirmed by as- 
serting the existence of the object as the speaker's 
belief. In RS2, confirmation can be made by putting 
a phrase for confirmation after the noun phrase de- 
scribing the object or by putting there a pause and 
a demonstrative pronoun appositively. 
Another pattern was observed in which RS1 was 
preceded by an utterance referring to a landmark 
used in the position description. This is also shown 
in Table 1 as RS11.  In RS11,  reference to the land- 
mark is realized by an imperative sentence that di- 
rects attention to the landmark or a tag question 
that confirms its existence. Examples are 
(3) 
(4) 
hontai no hidariue wo mi tekudasai, soko 
body upper-left oaa look REQUEST there 
ni chiisai botan ga arimasu. 
LOC small button SUBJ exist 
'Please look at the upper left of the body. There 
is a small button there.' 
daiarubotan no 1 arimasu yone. sono 
dial-button 1 exist CONFIRM its 
hidariue ni chiisai botan ga arimasu. 
upper-left LOC small button suBJ exist 
'There is dial button 1, isn't there? On its up- 
per left, there is a small button.'  
Table 1 shows the numbers of occurrences of each 
pattern in MMD and SMD. The total occurrence 
number was 30, as two objects fell under this cate- 
gory. RS11 and RS1 frequently occur in SMD. 
removing non-fluencies and the diversities caused by the 
factors mentioned in section 2.4 below. 
Towards Generation of Fluent Referring Action in Multimodal Situations 23 
Table 1: The schemata for referring to visible isolated objects and their occurrence frequency 
ID Pat tern /Descr i tp ion  MMD SMD 
\[position p\] ni(LoC) 
RS1 \[object description up\] ga(svBJ) arimasu(exist). 12 19 
\[object np\] wo(OBJ) \[action v\] tekudasai(REQUEST). 
RS2 \[object description up\] wo(OBJ) 13 5 
\[action v\] tekudasai(REQVESW) 
RS11 \[referring to a landmark s\], RS1 0 4 
Others 5 2 
2.3 Schemata  for re fer r ing to invis ible 
ob jects  and  group  members  
Five objects fell into the category of invisible isolated 
objects. Two schemata described in the previous 
subsection, RS1 and RS2, were used for referring to 
these objects by conveying the fact of which surface 
the object was located on as the position description. 
For example, 
(5) hontai no hidarigawa ni sashikomiguchi ga 
body left-side LOC socket SUBJ 
arimasu, soko ni sore wo ire tekudasai. 
exist there LOC it OBJ put REQUEST 
'There is a socket on the left side of the body. 
Please put it there.' 
(6) sore wo hontai hidarigawa no sashikomiguchi 
it OBJ body left-side socket 
ni ire tekudasai 
LOC put REQUEST 
'Please put it into the socket on the left side of 
the body.' 
In addition, RS11 and its RS2 corespondent, 
RS12, were used frequently. In these patterns, the 
surface on which the object is located is referred to 
in advance. It is achieved by an imperative sentence 
that directs attention to the surface or asks that the 
body be turned, or by an description of the side fol- 
lowed by a confirmation. Examples are 
(7) hontai hidarigawa no sokumen wo mi 
body left side OBJ look 
tekudasai, soko ni . . .  
REQUEST there LOC ...  
'Please look at the left side of the body. On 
that side, . . . '  
(8) hontai no hidari sokumen desu ne. 
body left side COPULA CONFIRM 
soko no mannakani .. .  
there center LOC.. .  
'The left side of the body, you see? On the cen- 
ter of that side, . . . '  
Table 2 shows the schemata based on these pat- 
terns and their numbers of occurrence; the total is 
75. RS2 is frequently used in MMD, while RS11 is 
frequently used in SMD. 
For referring to a visible group member, patterns 
are observed in which the group the object belongs 
to is referred to as a whole, in advance, and then the 
object is referred to as a member of that group. The 
first sentence of RS1 is mainly used for referring to 
the group as a whole. For example, 
(9) daiarubotan no shita ni onaji iro no 
dial-buttons below LOC SAME color 
botan ga itsutsu narande imasu. 
buttons suBJ five aligned be 
'Below the dial buttons, there are five buttons 
of the same color.' 
After this, RS1 or RS2 follows. These patterns, 
hereafter called RS21 and RS22, respectively, are 
shown in Table 3. In each pattern, the relative posi- 
tion of the object in the group is used as the position 
information conveyed later. In RS21, the following 
sentence, for example, follows the above. 
(10) sono migihashi ni supiika no maaku ga 
those right-most LOC speaker mark SUBJ 
tsuita botan ga arimasu 
being-placed-on button SUBJ exist 
'On the right most of those, there is a button 
with the mark of a speaker.' 
RS1 and RS2, in which a referring expression to a 
group does not constitute an utterance by itself are 
also observed, such as 
(11) ichiban-shita no botan no retsu no migihashi 
bottom buttons line right-most 
ni supiika no maaku ga tsuita 
LOC speaker mark SUBJ being-placed-on 
botan ga arimasu. 
button SUBJ exist 
'On the r ight  most of the line of buttons on 
the bottom, there is a button with a mark of a 
speaker.' 
In the above, although the expression referring to 
the group is part of the expression referring to the 
24 T. Kato and Y.L Nakano 
Table 2: The schemata for referring to invisible objects and their occurrence frequency 
ID  
RS1 
RS2 
R$11 
RSi2 
Others 
Pat tern /Descr i tp ion  I MMD 
\[referring to the side s/np\], RS1 
\[referring to the side s/np\], RS2 
SMD 
16 11 
23 7 
10 33 
5 5 
21 19 
member, information that the object is a member of 
a specific group is conveyed and the position relative 
to the group is used for describing the object's posi- 
tion. There are other patterns which do not contain 
such descriptions of groups at all. For example, 
(12) hontai migishita no supiika botan wo oshi 
body right-lower speaker button oBz push 
tekudasai. 
REQUEST 
"Push the speaker button on the lower right of 
the body.' 
According to this characteristic, RS1 and RS2 are 
divided into two patterns. RS1 and RS2 with de- 
scriptions of a group are called RSI '  and RS2' re- 
spectively, and RS1 and RS2 without descriptions 
of a group are called RSI" and RS2". Table 3 shows 
the numbers of occurrence. The total number is 60, 
as four objects fell into this category 6. RSI" and 
RS2" are frequently observed in MMD, while RS21 
and RS22 are frequently observed in SMD. 
Just one object was an invisible group member in 
our corpus. It was the button underneath the cas- 
sette cover. All referring expressions in both MMD 
and SMD contain an imperative sentence request- 
ing that the cassette cover be opened. It is con- 
sidered that this imperative sentence corresponds to 
the imperative sentences in RS11 and RS12 that di- 
rect attention to the side of the body or ask that the 
body be turned. Subsequent referring expressions 
follow the same patterns as for visible group mem- 
bers. The distribution of the patterns is also similar. 
That is, the schemata for referring to invisible group 
members are obtained as combinations of those for 
invisible objects and group members. 
2.4 Factors  that  compl i ca te  re fer r ing  
express ions  
The previous two subsections derived the schemata 
for referring expressions in line with the objects' cat- 
egorization based on two features. The schemata re 
6One object belonged to a group that contained an 
object already referred to. This implies that the group 
had already been identified. The usage of RS21 and 
RS22 was relatively scarce for that object. This sug- 
gests that referring expressions should be affected by the 
history of the group as well as of the object itself. 
just skeletons, and referring expressions with more 
diverse forms appear in the collected corpus. The 
most important origin of this diversity is that ex- 
planation dialogue is a cooperative process (Clark & 
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1990). First, several stages of a refer- 
ring action can trigger confirmation. Those confir- 
mations are realized by using various linguistic de- 
vices such as interrogative sentences, tag questions, 
and specific intonations. Second, related to incre- 
mental elaboration, appositive and supplemental ex- 
pressions are observed. For example, 
(13) rusu botan arimasu ne, gamen no 
OUT button exist CONFIRM display 
shita, "rusu" to kakareta shiroi botan. 
under "OUT" with being-labeled white button 
'There is an OUT button, under the display, a 
white button labeled "OUT."'  
These inherent dialogue features complicate re- 
ferring expressions. Moreover, it is difficult to de- 
rive patterns from exchanges in which the appren- 
tice plays a more active role such as talking about 
or checking her idea on the procedure in advance. 
The second origin of diversity relates to the fact 
that experts ometimes try to achieve multiple goals 
at the same time. Labeling an object with a proper 
name is sometimes achieved simultaneously with 
identifying it. This phenomena, however, could be 
schematized to some extent. Two patterns are ob- 
served. The one is to put the labeling sentence such 
as "This is called the speaker button" after the first 
sentence in RS1 or the noun phrase describing the 
object in RS2. The other is to use a proper name as 
the head of the noun phrase describing the object. 
An example is "the speaker button with the mark of 
a speaker". 
The third origin is the effect of the dialogue con- 
text which is determined external to the referring 
expressions. For example, almost half of the refer- 
ring expressions categorized into Others in the above 
tables fit one of the following two patterns, called 
RS3 hereafter. 
\[object function pp/comp\] \[object rip\] ga(SUBJ) 
\[position rip\] ni(LOC) arimasu(ezist). 
\[description f the features of the object s\] * 
Towards Generation of Fluent Referring Action in Multimodal Situations 25 
Table 3: The schemata for referring to group members and their occurrence frequency 
ID  
RS$1 
RS22 
RSI' 
RS2' 
RS1" 
RS2" 
Others 
Pat tern /Descr i tp ion  
\[referring to the group s\], RSi 
\[referring to the group s\], RS2 
RS1 (with group descriptions) 
RS2 (with group descriptions) 
RS1 (w/o group descriptions) 
RS2 (w/o group descriptions) 
MMD SMD 
4 12 
7 15 
0 4 
7 9 
12 7 
23 8 
7 5 
\[object function pp/comp\] [object np\] ga(SUBJ) 
\[position pp/comp\] [object description up\] 
desu(COeVLa). 
Both patterns, which assert the features of the 
object including its position, handle the availability 
of the object as old information. Examples of RS3 
are 
(14) onryou wo chousetsusuru botan ga 
volume oBJ control button SUBJ 
daiarubotan o hidariue ni arimasu. 
dial-buttons upper-left LOC exist 
'The button for controlling the volume is lo- 
cated to the upper left of the dial buttons.' 
(15) sonotame no botan ga daiarubotan no 
for-it button suBJ dial-buttons 
hidariue ni aru chiisai botan desu. 
upper-left LOC exist small button COPULA 
'The button for it is the small button to the 
upper left of the dial buttons.' 
These patterns are used when the existence of a 
specific function or an object used for such a func- 
tion was previously asserted. In those cases, as such 
an information is old, RS3 is appropriate, while all 
other schemata described above are not. Although it 
must be possible to classify pattern RS3 into smaller 
classes and to discuss the occurrence frequency and 
the situations in which they occur, the small num- 
bers involved prevented further investigation. 
2.5 Relat ion  to  prev ious  research  
The occurrence frequency of each schemata listed 
above supports the findings of our previous research 
summarized as P1 and P2 in the introduction. In 
RS1 and RS2, which are basis of all schemata, the 
object position is conveyed almost always under the 
guidance of the schemata themselves. In particu- 
lar, it is mandatory in RS1. So, the amount of 
information conveyed for identifying objects, how 
much is needed depends as a matter of course on 
the modes available, is controlled by feature descrip- 
tions other than position information. This causes 
P1, the property that the usage of position informa- 
tion does not decrease in MMD, while other kinds of 
information do decrease. In addition, this property 
is seen more strongly in MMD; RSI" and RS2" are 
used frequently wherein a group member directly is 
referred to directly to the object; the group is not 
mentioned. 
In SMD, RSI? and RS2? are used more fre- 
quently than in MMD. This means that references to 
the surface where the object is located and the group 
it belongs to tend to be made in an utterance differ- 
ent from the utterance referring to the object itself. 
In addition, R$'1 also appears more frequently in 
SMD than in MMD. This means an identification 
request and an action request are made separately. 
These are indications of P2, the property that ac- 
tions tend to be realized as an explicit goal and di- 
vided into a series of fine-grained steps in SMD. 
3 Actions coordinated with 
reference xpressions 
In MMD, several kinds of physical actions accom- 
pany referring expressions. Proper coordination be- 
tween such physical actions and linguistic expres- 
sions makes the referring actions fluent. In addition, 
referring expressions in MMD frequently use demon- 
stratives uch as "kore(this)" and "koko(here)" in re- 
lation to these actions. Investigating the constraints 
or patterns of this coordination and applying them 
to the schemata of referring expressions makes it 
possible to generate fluent action statements. 
Physical actions in referring actions in MMD are 
divided into the following three categories. 
Exh ib i t  act ions:  Actions for making object visible 
such as turning a body or opening a cassette 
cover 7. 
7Exhibit actions contain both general actions like 
turning the body and machine specific actions like open- 
ing the cassette cover. There may be some differences be- 
tween these two types of actions. For example, in refer- 
ring expressions, the latter is usually requested directly 
by an imperative sentence, while the former is requested 
indirectly by directing attention to a specific side or im- 
plicitly by mentioning that side. 
26 T. Kato and Y.L Nakano 
0.0 2.5 5.0s 
I honntai hidarigawa no ire tekudasai 
body left-side \[ put REQUEST 
soshitara mou ittan wo koko no sashikomiguchi ni\] 
\[ then the other end OBJ here socket LOC 
Then, put the other end into this socket on the left side of the body 
Figure 2: An example of temporal coordination of exhibit actions 
Pointing gestures: Deictic actions pointing to/at 
objects 
Simulated operations: Actions that are parts of 
machine operations uch as pushing a button 
and picking up a handset. In instruction di- 
alogues, experts ometimes just simulate these 
actions without actual execution. 
This section reports the patterns of temporal coor- 
dination of these actions with linguistic expressions, 
based on the observation of the corpus. Videotapes 
of just 48 referring actions (4 experts referred to 12 
objects once each) were examined. As the amount 
of data is so small, we provide only a qualitative 
discussion. 
3.1 Exhibit actions 
Only invisible objects need exhibit actions when 
they are referred to. Being those objects referred 
to, whichever scheme listed above is used, the infor- 
mation of the position or surface where the object 
is located is conveyed ahead of other features of the 
object. That is, letting the linguistic expression just 
before the referring expression be Lbfr, the position 
description be Lpos, and the object description be 
Lob1, the temporal relation of those can be summa- 
rized as follows using Allen's temporal logic (Allen, 
1084). 
Lblr before Lpos before Lobj 
Accompanying these expressions, exhibit action 
At, and pointing gesture Ap, have the following re- 
lations. 
Lobj starts Ap 
Lbyr before At before Lobj 
Lpo, overlaps \]overlaps -1 \] during \]during -1 Ae 
The pointing gesture to the object begins at the 
same time of the beginning of the object description. 
The exhibit action is done between the end of the ut- 
terance just before the referring action and the be- 
ginning of the object description. The exhibit action 
and position description relates loosely. There may 
be a temporal overlap between them or one may be 
done during the other. More precise relation than 
this could not concluded. In order to keep these 
relations, pauses of a proper length are put before 
and/or after the position description if needed. 
Fig. 2 shows a schematic depiction of the above 
relations and an example taken from the corpus. 
3.2 Point ing gestures and s imulated 
operations 
Pointing gestures are faithfully synchronized to lin- 
guistic expressions. During action statements, al- 
most all descriptions of objects or positions are ac- 
companied by pointing gestures. Landmarks and 
object groups are also pointed to. When a point- 
ing gesture is not made to the currently described 
object, no pointing gesture is made. Pointing ges- 
tures to objects other than the currently described 
one never happen. One exception to this constraint 
is scheme RS3. When the subject part of RS3, which 
is an object description, is uttered, no pointing ges- 
ture is provided. A pointing gesture begins as the 
position description begins. 
The linguistic description of an object, Lobj, and a 
pointing gesture to it, Ap, basically satisfy the tem- 
poral relation, Lobj starts Ap. That is, Lobj and Ap 
begin at the same time, but Ap lasts longer. How- 
ever, the constraint mentioned above, that pointing 
gesture to objects other than currently described one 
never happen overrides this relation. As a result, in 
general, the pointing gesture to an object begins af- 
ter finishing reference to other objects. As other 
? Towards Generation of Fluent Referring Action in Multimodal Situations 
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 s 
" k i l l  
? "T, -: " rT' "v  "l'r, TM 
27 
kochira no 
these I 
i 
daiarubotan no tonari ni \[ 
I dail-buttons next LOC 
Pointing gesture to the dial buttons Pointing gestures to the button 
Next of these dial buttons, there is a button with the mark of a handset. Please push this. 
I L I 
juwaki no maaku no tsuita botan arimasu yone 
handset mark being-placed-on button exist CONFRIM 
kore wo oshi temi tekudasai 
this OBJ push REQUEST 
Figure 3: An example of temporal coordination of pointing gestures 
objects are usually mentioned as landmarks for de- 
scribing the object position, a pointing esture to the 
object begins midway through position description. 
Ap usually lasts after Lobj. In particular, a pointing 
gesture to the main object of a referring expression 
lasts till the utterance nds and the addressee ac- 
knowledges it. So, in the case of RS1, a pointing 
gesture lasts till the end of the sentence that asserts 
object existence. 
When more than one noun phrase or postposi- 
tional phrase describing the same object are uttered 
successively as in cases of appositive xpressions, the 
pointing gestures are once suspended at the end of 
a phrase and resumed at the beginning of the next 
phrase. This is prominent when the next phrase be- 
gins with a demonstrative such as "this". 
Simulated operations are synchronized with the 
verb describing the corresponding operation. Their 
synchronization is more precise than the case of ex- 
hibit actions. As a simulated operation such as but- 
ton pushing is similar to a pointing gesture, a sus- 
pension and resumption similar to one mentioned 
above is done probably to distinguish them. 
Fig. 3 shows an example taken from the corpus. In 
this example, it is not clear whether the last action 
is a pointing gesture or a simulated operation. 
4 D iscuss ion  on  imp lementat ion  
We have began to implement a referring action gen- 
eration mechanism using the schemata derived and 
coordination patterns described so far. The experi- 
mental system we are now developing shows a GIF 
picture of the telephone, and draws a caricatured 
agent over it. The pointing gestures are realized 
by redrawing the agent. As every picture is anno- 
tated by the object positions it contains, generating 
a pointing gesture and interpreting user's one are 
possible and easy. Other actions uch as turning the 
body and opening the cassette cover are realized by 
playing a corresponding digital movie at exactly the 
same place as the GIF picture displayed s. The first 
frame of the digital move is the same as the GIF 
picture shown at that point of the time, and while 
the movie is being played, the picture in the back- 
ground is switched to the one equaling the last frame 
of the movie. Fig. 4 depicts this mechanism. Those 
actions need considerable time as do human experts. 
This is in contrast o our previous ystem which im- 
plemented such actions by switching pictures o the 
time taken was negligible. 
The framework adopted for coordination between 
utterances and actions is synchronization by refer- 
ence points (Blakowski, 1992). The beginning and 
end points of intonational phrases must be eligible 
as reference points. It's still under consideration if 
just waiting, for which pauses are put after the ac- 
tion finished earlier, is enough or more sophisticated 
operations such as acceleration and deceleration i.e. 
changing utterance speed, are needed. The need for 
dynamic planning such as used in PPP (Andre & 
Rist, 1996) should be examined. 
5 Summary  and  fu ture  work  
What patterns of linguistic expressions are com- 
monly used and how physical actions are temporally 
coordinated to them were reported based on cor- 
8Tcl/tk is used for showing the GIF pictures and 
drawing the agent as well as other basic input/output 
functions; xanim is used for playing the digital movies. 
28 T. Kato and Y.L Nakano 
User View 
I I : Snapshot A Turning from A to B Snapshot B t2n ? 
fiDra~/.~nactbn fern AtD 
I ShowingGIFpietureAp, ~G~ ShowingGIFpictureB 
Figure 4: The implementation f turn actions 
pus examinations. In particular, by categorizing ob- 
jects according to two features, visibility and mem- 
bership, the schemata of referring expressions could 
be derived. This categorization is still not sufficient 
for uniquely determining each reference xpression, 
and some other features must impact he expressions 
used. This is, however, a good first step, as the two 
most dominant features were obtained. Moreover, 
the difference between the occurrence frequencies of
those schemata in MMD and SMD explains the find- 
ings of our previous research. Implementation based 
on these results is on going. 
There is a lot of future work beyond the imple- 
mentation issues. First, the reported coordination 
patterns between linguistic expressions and actions 
must be verified in a quantitative manner. An ob- 
jective criterion for annotating visual information is
hard to establish. Overcoming this problem is im- 
portant and unavoidable. Next, our research must 
be generalized in two perspectives: the results must 
be confirmed in many materials other than our tele- 
phone; the degree of dependency on the language 
used must be examined. 
One of major problems temming from our ap- 
proach is that the importance ofcriteria is not clear. 
Although the criteria can be derived by observing 
and modeling the explanations made by experts, 
there may be fluent explanation techniques not yet 
observed. Deviations from the criteria do not cause 
a big problem, and the recipients do not perceive 
them to be awkward. These problems can be ex- 
amined when the system currently implemented is 
made to generate several types of referring actions 
experimentally. 
Appelt, D.E., "Planning English Referring Expres- 
sions", Artificial Intelligence 26, 1985, pp. 1 - 33 
Blakowski, G., Hiiel, J., Langrehr, U. and Miilh~er, 
J., "Tool Support for the Synchronization and 
Presentation of Distributed Multimedia", Com- 
puter Communication, Vol. 15, No. 10, 1992, pp. 
611 - 618 
Cassell, J., Pelachaud, C., Badler, N. and et al, 
"Animated Conversation: Rule-based Generation 
of Facial Expression, Gesture & Spoken Intona- 
tion for Multiple Conversational Agents", SIG- 
GRAPH 94, pp. 413 - 420, 1994 
Cohen, P.R., "The Pragmatics of Referring and 
the Modality of Communication", Computational 
Linguistics, Vol. 10, No. 2, 1984, pp. 97 - 146 
Clark, H.H. and Wilkes-Gibbs, D. "Referring as a 
Collaborative Process", "Intentions in Communi- 
cation" eds. Cohen, P.R., Morgan, J. and Pollack, 
M.E., The MIT Press, 1990, pp. 463 - 493 
Dalai, M., Feiner, S., McKeown, K. and et al, 
"Nagotiation for Automated Generation of Tem- 
poral Multimedia Presentations", Proc. of ACM 
Multimedia 96, pp. 55 - 64, 1996 
Dale, R. and Haddock, N., "Content Determination 
in the Generation of Referring Expressions", Com- 
putational Intelligence, Vol. 7, No. 4, 1991. pp. 252 
- 265 
Feiner, S.K., Litman, D.J., McKeown, K.R, and Pas- 
sonneau, R.J., "Towards Coordinated Temporal 
Multimedia Presentations", "Intelligent Multime- 
dia Interfaces" eds. Maybury, M.T., The AAAI 
Press/The MIT Press, 1993, pp. 117 - 138 
Kato, T. and Nakano, Y.I., "Referent Identifica- 
tion Requests in Multi-Modal Dialogs", Procs. of 
Int. Conf. on Cooperative Multimodal Communi- 
cation, Vol. 2, pp. 175 - 191, 1995 
Kato, T., Nakano, Y.I., Nakajima, H. and Hasegawa, 
T., "Interactive Multimodal Explanations and 
their Temporal Coordination", Procs. of ECAI- 
96, pp. 261 - 265, 1996 
Kuno, S., "Danwa no Bunpou", Taishuukan Shoten, 
1978, In Japanese 
References  
Allen, J.F., "Towards a General Theory of Action 
and Time", Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 23, No. 2, 
1984, pp. 123- 154 
Andr4, E. and Rist, T., "Coping with Temporal Con- 
straints in Multimedia Presentation Planning", 
Procs. of AAAI-96, Vol. 1, pp. 142 - 147, 1996 
