Dia logue Strategies for Improving the Usabi l i ty  of Te lephone 
Human-Mach ine  Communicat ion  
Morena Danieli, Elisabetta Gerbino, and Loreta M. Moisa 
CSELT - Centro Studi e Laborator i  Telecomunicazioni  
Via G. Reiss-Romoli 274 
1-10148, Torino, Italia 
danieli,gerbino,loret a@cselt .it 
Abst rac t  
Interactions with spoken language systems 
may present breakdowns that are due to 
errors in the acoustic decoding of user ut- 
terances. Some of these errors have impor- 
tant consequences in reducing the natural- 
ness of human-machine dialogues. In this 
paper we identify some typologies of recog- 
nition errors that cannot be recovered ur- 
ing the syntactico-semantic analysis, but 
that may be effectively approached at the 
dialogue level. We will describe how non- 
understanding and the effects of misrecog- 
nition are dealt with by Dialogos, a real- 
time spoken dialogue system that allows 
users to access a database of railway in- 
formation by telephone. We will discuss 
the importance of supporting confirmation 
turns, and clarification and correction sub- 
dialogues. We will show the positive ffects 
of robust dialogue management and dia- 
logue state dependent language modeling, 
by taking into account both the recogni- 
tion and understanding performance, and 
the success rate of dialogue transactions. 
1 In t roduct ion  
During the last few years the recognition of sponta- 
neous speech in telephone applications "has greatly 
improved; nevertheless spoken dialogue between 
computers and inexperienced users still presents 
some problematic ssues that reduce the user satis- 
faction in interacting with spoken language systems. 
The occurrence of errors in the acoustic decod- 
ing of users' utterance is the potential cause of mis- 
communication in oral interaction with spoken lan- 
guage systems. Some of these errors have important 
consequences in reducing the naturalness ofhuman- 
machine dialogues. Sometimes a robust approach in 
parsing and the use of language models during recog- 
nition are not sufficient o avoid recognition break- 
downs. The recognition performance has a direct 
impact on the requirements hat the dialogue mod- 
ules of spoken language systems have to meet. In 
order to increase the usability of the applications, di- 
alogue management modules have to deal with par- 
tial or total breakdowns of the lower levels of anal- 
ysis by preventing and detecting miscommunication 
sources. 
In this paper we identify some typologies of recog- 
nition errors that cannot be recovered uring the 
syntactico-semantic analysis, but that may be effec- 
tively approached at the dialogue level. Our anal- 
ysis and the methodologies we describe have been 
tested in a task-oriented telephone application, but 
we deem that some considerations may also be use- 
ful for other display-less human-machine commu- 
nication applications. We will describe how non- 
understanding and the effects of misrecognition are 
dealt with in Dialogos, a real-time spoken language 
system that allows/users to access a database of rail- 
way information by using the telephone. A detailed 
description of the different modules of Dialogos may 
be found in (Albesano et al, 1997). In this paper 
we will discuss the importance of supporting confir- 
mation turns, and clarification and correction subdi- 
alogues. The dialogue module of Dialogos makes an 
extensive use of context knowledge: contextual in- 
formation is used not only for validating or rejecting 
semantic interpretations, but it is also sent to the 
lower levels of input analysis for helping the recog- 
nizer. We will show that the positive ffects of robust 
dialogue management and dialogue state dependent 
language modeling may be evaluated by taking into 
account both the recognition and understanding per- 
formance, and the success rate of dialogue transac- 
tions. 
From our experience we may conclude that if 
we provide robust behaviour in our dialogue sys- 
tems, speech is a viable interface even with rela- 
tively low word accuracy rates. Nevertheless we 
believe that some important issues are still unex- 
plored, and one of these is related to the weight hat 
recognition errors have with respect o the degree 
of co-operativeness of the users. These open issues 
and some experimental data that emphasize their 
I14 
urgency will be discussed in the section on experi- 
mental data. 
2 Recogn i t ion  er rors  and  
natura lness  o f  d ia logue  
State-of-the-art systems that receive their input by 
high-quality microphone have word accuracy scores 
above 90%. However, the recognition of spontaneous 
speech in telephone nvironment is below that rate. 
Actually, the telephone input of the recognizer may 
greatly differ from the uttered acoustic signal, due to 
the noisy environment of the call, and to the quality 
of the telephone microphone and propagation et- 
work. 
Most current task-oriented applications of tele- 
phone human-machine dialogue are developed for 
being used by a large population of potential users. 
These applications require speaker independent real- 
time systems, and the opportunity of having training 
sessions with the system cannot be provided. The 
speaker independent recognizers designed for such 
applications assure the coverage of a great number 
of speakers, but some aspects of the speech modal- 
ity of some users can induce the recognizer to make 
mistakes, especially in recognizing long sentences. 
The adverse recognition environment and the vari- 
ability in user dependent features are the most fre- 
quent reasons of three kinds of recognition errors. 
The speech community usually classifies these errors 
into deletions, insertions, and substitutions. Some 
of them may be prevented by using language models 
during the recognition. 
At present, some approaches to language model- 
ing take advantage of contextual information sent 
by the dialogue model. However, the task of the di- 
alogue state dependent language modeling is more 
difficult in some application domains. For example, 
some of the task-oriented systems that give informa- 
tion about railway timetable, or flight scheduling, 
have large vocabularies that contain an huge num- 
ber of words belonging to the same class: for exam- 
ple, Dialogos vocabulary is 3,500 words, including 
2,983 proper names of places; another example is the 
LIMSI Arise Railway Information system (Lamel et 
al., 1996) that has 1,500 words, including more than 
680 station names. This peculiarity directly impacts 
on the performance of the language models, that is 
in these applications, language modeling predictions 
are weaker: when the dialogue prediction says that 
next user's utterance is likely to be about a depar- 
ture place, this does not exclude that the recognizer 
substitutes the actually uttered name with a pho- 
netically similar one. Only the user is able to detect 
such kinds of errors. In this situation the dialogue 
system should identify the user's detection of mis- 
communication and provide appropriate repairs. 
All the problems described above lead to the de- 
crease of the recognition performance and of the us- 
ability of spoken language systems. More specifi- 
cally, they identify some severe requirements that 
spoken dialogue modules have to meet. In particu- 
lar, dialogue systems for telephone applications have 
to rely not only on an adequate model of the human 
user, but they should also implement particular tech- 
niques for preventing and recovering communication 
breakdowns. 
3 P revent ion  and  Repa i r  o f  
M iscommunicat ion  
3.1 Prevent ion of miscommunicat ion 
The user modeling of the dialogue module of Dialo- 
gos is based on the assumption that both the system 
and the user are active agents that cooperate in or- 
der to fulfill the goal of the speech interaction. In 
the application domain of Dialogos the goal of the 
interaction is to collect all the parameters that are 
necessary to access the railway database for retriev- 
ing the information that satisfy user's needs. 
T1-S: 
T2-U:  
T3-S: 
T4-U:  
T5-S:  
T6-U:  
Hello, This is Tra in  Enqu i ry  Service. 
Please speak after the tone. 
Please s ta te  your  depar ture  and your  dest inat ion.  
Voglio par t i re  da  Mi ls(no)-  Mi lano di sera.  
Vado da  Mi lano a Roma.  
I mould like to leave from Milano ... Milano 
in the evening. 
\[ am going from Milano to Rome.  
VOGLIO PAB.TIB.E DA NO MILANO SERA 
VADO DA MILANO P,.OMA 
WANT LEA VE FROM NO MILANO EVENING 
GO FROM MILANO TO ROMA 
< confirm=NO, dep-city=MILANO, 
< arr.city=ROMA, part-day=EVENING> 
Do you want  to go f rom Mi lano to Roma 
leaving in the evening? 
Si ... da  Mi lano a Roma di sera.  
Yes ... from Milano to Roma in the evening. 
SI BLOW DA MILANO ROMA SEtLA 
YES BLOW FROM MILANO ROMA EVENING 
< confirm=YES, dep.city=MILANO, 
arr-city=ROMA, dep.t ime=EVENING> 
There are many t ra ins  in the evening. 
Which hour  do you want  to leave? 
Mah ... mi d ica  se c 'e '  qua lcosa  nile otto.  
Who knows ... Tell me if there is something at 
eight. 
MATTINO GINOSA ALLE  OTTO 
MORNING GINOSA AT  E IGHT 
<part-day=MORNING, city=GINOSA, 
hour=EIGHTy 
TT-S: Tra in  243 leaves f rom Mi lano Cent ra le  at  8:20 p.m.; 
it arr ives at Roma Termini  at  S a.m. 
Do you need addi t ional  in format ion  about  this t ra in?  
Figure 1: Excerpt from the Dialogos corpus 
As it was explained above, telephone recognition 
is error-prone. For preventing recognition errors the 
dialogue system sends to the lower levels of anal- 
ysis information about the domain objects focused 
during each turn of the interaction; this information 
allows the triggering of context dependent language 
models that help to constraint the lexical choices at 
115 
the recognition level (see section 4). Moreover, in 
order to detect recognition or interpretation errors 
that occurred in previous turns, the dialogue system 
takes advantage from the global history of the inter- 
action and it only accepts interpretations of user's 
input that are coherent with the dialogue history. 
For example, let us consider the excerpt from the 
Dialogos corpus shown in Figure 1. In the exam- 
ple, on the left, the letter 'T' stands for 'Turn', the 
letters 'U' and 'S' stand for user and system, respec- 
tively. In each user's turn we reported in Italian 
the original user's utterance and its English transla- 
tion (in italics). Then we have transcribed the best 
decoded sequence (in ALL CAPS), that is the rec- 
ognizer output. The translations into English of the 
best decoded sequences are shown in ALL CAPS (in 
italics). The task-oriented semantic frames (the in- 
put of the dialogue module) have been put between 
angles. The system turns have been only reported 
in their English translation. 
In T2-U the user utterance contains an hesita- 
tion when uttering the name of the departure city, 
"Milano". The first part of the word, "Mila-" was 
misrecognized as a noise, and the last syllable was 
recognized as "no", that the parser interpreted as the 
negation adverb "no". In this initial dialogue con- 
text there were no parameters to be denied, and the 
dialogue module was able to discard this information 
related to the negative adverb. It addressed the user 
with the request of confirmation of T3-S. T4-U was 
a confirmation turn of the user. After having con- 
sulted the data in the railway database, the system 
realized that the number of connections between Mi- 
lano and Roma in the evening was high, and it sug- 
gested the user to choose a more precise departure 
time (T5-S). In T6-U the utterance segment "mah 
... mi dica se c'e' qualcosa" (who knows ... tell me if 
there is something) was misrecognized as "matt ino 
Ginosa" (morning Ginosa, where "Ginosa" is the 
name of an Italian village). As a consequence, the 
parser output contains another value for the part-of- 
day parameter and a departure hour. However, the 
dialogue discarded the information about the part- 
of-day, since this conflicted with a parameter value 
that the user had already confirmed, and only the 
second part of the utterance interpretation was re- 
tained (that is, the departure hour). In this case 
the insertion of a concept due to misrecognition was 
repaired at the dialogue level 1 . 
As we can see from the example, the dialogue 
module makes use of confirmation turns because it 
deals with potentially incorrect information. How- 
ever, the need for confirmations may result in a lack 
1This version of Dialogos only considers the first best 
solution. If the expected information is not found in the 
semantic representation f the current user's utterance, 
the dialogue system hypothesizes that something went 
wrong in the previous analysis, and it interprets that 
situation as an occurrence of non-understanding. 
of naturalness of the telephone human-machine dia- 
logues. In order to reduce the number of confirma- 
tion turns, we use the following strategies: 
? the dialogue system avoids confirmation turns 
when the acquired information is coherent with 
the dialogue history and with the current focus 
? the dialogue system asks for multiple confirma- 
tions of the acquired parameters (as in T3-S) 
? the dialogue system asks for implicit confirma- 
tions whenever it is possible (as "From Milano 
to Roma. When do you want to travel?") 
3.2 Repa i r  of  miscommunicat ion  
Sometimes the detection of some recognition errors 
(for example, the substitution of an uttered word 
with another one of the same class) is outside of 
the capabilities of both the parser and the dialogue 
modules. On the contrary, in principle the user 
is able to detect and correct such errors, and of- 
ten she does it immediately or in subsequent turns. 
In (Danieli, 1996) an analysis of such phenomena is
offered, and the method described in that paper is 
currently implemented in Dialogos. The approach 
is based on pragmatic-based xpectations about the 
semantic ontent of the user utterance in the next 
turn. The theoretical background is the account of 
human-human conversation given by (Grice, 1967), 
re-interpreted in the context of human-computer 
conversation. In particular, the dialogue system is 
able to deal with non-understandings and misunder- 
standings (see (Hirst et al, 1994) for the classifica- 
tion of non-understanding, misunderstanding, and 
misconception), and it may recognize the occurrence 
of a miscommunication phenomena on the basis of 
the occurrence of two pragmatic ounterparts, that 
is the deviation of the the user's behaviour from the 
system expectations, and the generation of a conver- 
sational implicature. 
Non-understanding is recognized by the dialogue 
system as soon as it happens, because the system 
is not able to find any interpretation of the current 
user turn. On the contrary, misunderstandings are 
more difficult to detect and solve, because usually 
the dialogue system may get an interpretation of the 
user's utterance, but that interpretation is not the 
one intended by the speaker. If the user's correction 
of a misunderstanding occurs when the parameter is
focused (that is, it occurs as a third-turn repair, see 
(Schegloff, 1992)), the focusing mechanism and the 
dialogue expectations allow to grasp the correction 
immediately. However, it is more problematic to de- 
tect user's corrections if they happen some turns af- 
ter the occurrence of the errors. The dialogue system 
initially interprets user's correction with respect o 
its current set of expectations. As soon as it realizes 
that there is a deviation of the user behaviour from 
the expected behaviour, it hypothesizes a misunder- 
standing, and it re-interprets the current utterance 
116 
on the basis of the context of the misunderstood ut- 
terance (thanks to a focus-shifting mechanism). 
Finally, the output of the parsing module may be 
only partially determined. In that case the dialogue 
module initiates clarification subdialogues. Let us 
discuss the excerpt shown in Figure 2. 
TI-S: 
T2-U: 
T3-S: 
T4-U:  
T5-S:  
Hello, Th is  is Tra in  Enqui ry  Service. 
P lease speak  af ter  the tone. 
P lease s ta te  your  depar ture  and  your  dest inat ion.  
A Firenze. 
To F i renze.  
BLOW F IRENZE 
BL 0 W F IR  ENZE 
< ? i ty=F IRENZE> 
Are  your  leaving from Firenze or go ing to F i renze? 
Devo andare  a Firenze. 
I have to go to F irenze.  
DEVO ANDARE A F IRENZE 
MUST GO TO F IRENZE 
< ar r -c i ty=F IRENZE> 
To Firenze. Where  are you leaving f rom? 
Figure 2: Example of miscommunication 
In T2-U the arrival city is recognized and under- 
stood as a generic city, the dialogue strategy does 
not reject this information but it enters a clarifi- 
cation subdialogue in order to solve the ambiguity 
(T3-S and T4-U). The last turn of the system is 
a dialogue act that fulfill two communicative goals, 
that is the (implicit) confirmation of the arrival city 
and the request of the departure city. However, clar- 
ification subdialogues may be avoided if the dialogue 
expectations allow to choose an interpretation f am- 
biguous input. 
Clarification subdialogues may also occur in case 
of parser outputs that contain inconsistent related 
information. Those may be so either because of 
recognition errors, or because of user's misconcep- 
tions. In our application domain misconceptions, 
i.e. errors in the prior knowledge of a participant, 
usuMly concern the expression of departure dates, 
as in the dialogue xcerpt shown in Figure 3. The 
conversation took place on Thursday February, 27th 
1997: 
TI-S: 
T2-U: 
T3-S: 
What  date  do you travel?  
Voglio partire domenico ... il p r imo mayo.  
I want  to leave on Sunday  ... March,  Ist .  
VOGLIO PART IRE  DOMENICA O PR IMO MARZO 
WANT LEAVE SUNDAY @ F IRST  MARCH 
< w-day ,SUNDAY day=FIRST  month=MARCH> 
Are your travelling on March, Ist or next Sunday? 
Figure 3: Example of miscommunication due to mis- 
conception 
The dialogue system recognizes the misconcep- 
tion in T2-U because the week day, the day, and 
the month are n6t interpretable with respect o its 
knowledge of the year's calendar (and the computer 
presumes that its calendar is correct). Moreover the 
dialogue system finds that different chunks of the in- 
formation supplied by the user could be coherently 
interpretable. Since it has no principled way to de- 
cide between them, it initiates the clarification sub- 
dialogue of T3-S. 
4 D ia logue  Sta te  Dependent  
Language Mode l ing  
The dialogue module makes use of pragmatic-based 
expectations about the semantic ontent of the next 
user's utterance. In order to improve speech recog- 
nition performance the contextual knowledge may 
be used as a constraint for the language models. 
Contextual information is sent to the lower levels 
of analysis by communicating the dialogue act pro- 
duced by the system for addressing the user. In Dial- 
ogos there are four classes of dialogue acts (request, 
confirmation, clarification, and request plus confir- 
mation). Each class is further specialized with the 
indication of the focused parameters: for example 
"request:date of departure" if the system is asking 
the user to provide a departure date, "request-plus- 
confirmation: departure-plus-arrival", when the sys- 
tem is addressing the user with a feed-back about 
the departure city and a request of the arrival city, 
and so on. The information about the system dialog 
act is called "dialogue prediction". The recognizer 
makes use of the predictions by selecting a specific 
language model which was trained on a coherent par- 
tition of the training corpus (Popovici and Baggia, 
1997). 
The training set was collected in previous experi- 
mentationsof the system: users' responses to specific 
system dialog act were classified for training different 
language models. At present, the speech recognizer 
makes use of a class-based bigram model; then, in 
order to re-score the n-best decoded sequences, it 
uses a class-based trigram model. 
In order to measure the improvements in recogni- 
tion performance obtained using dialogue state de- 
pendent language models, we compared the differ- 
ences in the Word Accuracy (WA) and Sentence 
Understanding (SU) rates obtained using different 
language models on the same test set. The test set 
included 2,040 utterances, randomly selected from 
corpus data collected uring a field trial of Dialogos 
with 500 unexperienced subjects. In the first exper- 
iment, a single context-independent la guage model 
was used; it was trained on a set of 15,575 utterances 
(produced by Italian native speakers). In the second 
experiment, a set of dialogue state dependent mod- 
els, trained on the same training set of the first ex- 
periment, was used; however in this case the training 
set was encoded according to the different dialogue 
states, as explained above. The error rate reduction 
between the two experiments i 8.6% of WA and 
10.9% of SU. Moreover, with an improved acoustic 
I17 
model (trained on a domain dependent training-set) 
the error reduction is even greater (over 12%) for 
both WA and SU. 
5 Experimental Data 
The Dialogos corpus consists of 1,404 dialogues, in- 
cluding 13,123 utterances. All the calls were per- 
formed over the public telephone network and in dif- 
ferent environments (house, office, street, and car). 
The WA and SU results on the global utterance 
corpus were: 61% for WA and 76% for SU. These 
results were greatly influenced by the quality of the 
telephone acoustic signal, and by the noise environ- 
ment. Moreover, several city names contained in the 
dictionary of the system could be easily confused. 
The overall system performance was measured 
with the Transaction Success (TS) metric, i.e. the 
measure of the success of the system in providing 
users with the information they require (Danieli and 
Gerbino, 1995). The TS rate was 70% on the 1,404 
dialogues. By excluding from the corpus a set of dia- 
logues that failed for users' errors, we obtained a TS 
result of 84%. The average successful dialogue dura- 
tion is about 2 minutes: in most of the dialogues all 
the parameters were acquired and confirmed uring 
the first minute of user-system interaction. 
It is an open issue if a spoken dialogue system has 
to generate a clarification subdialogue when faced 
with ambiguity or unclear input. For example, the 
system described in (Allen et al, 1996) was designed 
on the basis of the principle that it was better to as- 
sume an interpretation and, of course, to be able 
to understand corrections when they arise. On the 
contrary, Dialogos was designed to enter clarification 
subdialogues when faced with input that cannot re- 
ceive a single coherent interpretation i  the dialogue 
context. Actually, we think that in general the strat- 
egy implemented by (Allen et al, 1996) may be more 
effective for the naturalness of the dialogue, how- 
ever we believe that the effectiveness of that choice 
greatly depends on the ability of the users to grasp 
inconsistencies in the system feed-back. In the Di- 
alogos corpus we observed that while subjects were 
usually able to correct errors in confirmation turns 
that concern a single information, or two semanti- 
cally related information (such departure and ar- 
rival); on the contrary, some errors were not cor- 
rected when the feedback was offered together with 
a system initiative, or when the system asked to con- 
firm information that had not strong relationships. 
The dialogue shown in Figure 4 is a typical example. 
The acoustic decoding of "Allora" (a word that 
is used in Italian for taking turn) was erroneous: 
it was substituted with "All 'una" (at one o'clock). 
This was interpreted as a departure hour. A con- 
junct confirmation of departure hour and arrival city 
was asked and the user confirmed both of them. In 
next section we will elaborate more on users' error. 
T i -S :  
T2-U:  
T3-S: 
T4-U:  
Hello, Th is  is Tra in  Enqu i ry  Service. 
Please speak  after the tone.  
Please s ta te  your  depar ture  and  your  dest inat ion.  
A l lora  ... vado a Mi lano.  
Then ... I am going to Mi lano.  
ALL 'UNA VADO A MILANO 
AT ONE GO TO MILANO 
<hour=UNA,  a r r -e i ty=MILANO> 
Do you want  to go to Mi lano leaving at 13:00? 
Si. 
Yes. 
Sl 
YES 
Figure 4: Example of erroneous confirmation 
For the sake of the present discussion, this example 
shows us that users are not always able to correct 
errors: on the contrary, we have seen above that the 
percentage of users' errors is high. In order to eval- 
uate the effectiveness of the different approaches to 
face ambiguity we should experiment the different 
strategies on the same domain, or at least with the 
same interaction modality (phone or microphone). 
However, we have obtained some data that may give 
some insights on the issue. In the Dialogos corpus 
we have calculated the number of turns necessary 
for acquiring departure and arrival cities in the suc- 
cessful dialogues. While 64% of the users were able 
to give them in two turns (that is without experi- 
encing recognition errors), the remaining 36% took 
from three to eight turns, i.e. these users' spent in 
correction from three to eight turns. Since the per- 
centage of users that was not able to detect recogni- 
tion errors is around 16%, we may hypothesize that 
a part of the subjects that experienced clarification 
subdialogues would have failed to give the correct 
values of the task parameters. Moreover, if we con- 
sider the cost of clarifications and repairs in terms 
of time, that is not awfully high: giving departure 
and arrival in less than three turns (that is, without 
clarifications or repair) takes from 20 to 29 seconds, 
while the entering of repair subdialogues increased 
this time of an average of 25 seconds on the total 
average time of the dialogues. 
6 Discussion 
By analizing the Dialogos corpus, we identified some 
topics that require further work. 
The first one is related to the need for goal man- 
agement: in the task domain of Dialogos the goal is 
fixed during all the dialogue, but that is a simpli- 
fication of the travel inquiry domain, introduced to 
control the complexity of interaction in order to meet 
the real-time requirement. However, we believe that 
the ability of the dialogue system to support goal 
management would greatly increase the naturalness 
of dialogue, as the work by (Allen et al, 1996) shows. 
The second problematic issue is related to the im- 
pact that recognition errors have on the user be- 
118 
haviour. By examining the Dialogos corpus we col- 
lected evidence that some critical situations occur 
when the users make experience of repetitive recog- 
nition errors. The recognition errors seem to cause 
a cognitive overload in the users that influence their 
degree of co-operativeness. In our task domain most 
of the recognition errors occur during the recogni- 
tion of departure city and arrival city. When users 
are asked to repeat a city name that was misrec- 
ognized by the system, some of them modify their 
way of speaking: they repeat the name louder, or 
spelt it, or even accept a misrecognized name pro- 
posed by the system. In this corpus 15.1% of the 
dialogues failed for users' errors. Similar behaviour 
has been described in (Bernsen, Dybkjaer, and Dy- 
bkjaer, 1996). 
During the evaluation of the Dialogos corpus we 
classified the users' errors into two main classes: 
1. the user confirmed a task parameter value that 
derived from a misrecognition (76% of the users' 
errors) after having experienced several recog- 
nition errors; 
2. the user accepted a task parameter derived from 
a word that was inserted by the recognizer and 
interpreted by the parser (24%). 
We applied the above classification i  a different 
experimental set-up: in May 1996 a laboratory test 
was designed to study the reaction of users to differ- 
ent speech technologies and dialogue strategies ap- 
plied to the railway information domain. 48 naive 
subjects took part in the experiment: they were 
equally distributed by sex; the age range was from 18 
to 62 years. The subjects of this experiment called 
Dialogos and another spoken dialogue system. Each 
of them played two different predetermined scenar- 
ios with each system; after the trial, they were in- 
terviewed (the discussion of this experiment may be 
found in (Billi, Castagneri, and Danieli, 1997)). By 
analyzing the 96 dialogues between Dialogos and 
the experimental subjects, we found that the oc- 
currence of users' errors could be classified into the 
two classes described above, that is users' errors 
were always condomitant with substitutions or in- 
sertions in the best-decoded sequence. In partic- 
ular, in both the experiments subjects reaction to 
recognition errors was characterized by an alteration 
in the way of speaking. In the interviews collected 
in the second experimented, the subjects that made 
errors expressed the fatigue in experimenting repet- 
itive recognition errors. However, we hypothesize 
that the non-cooperative b haviour may be partially 
due to the artificial experimental conditions: we are 
planning to experiment the current version of Dialo- 
gos in a real environment with users that really need 
to take trains for travelling all around Italy, and that 
will use the system for having timetable information. 
While there are clearly many aspects in which 
our current approach requires further work, we may 
claim that speech is a viable interface if we provide 
spoken systems with robust dialogue management. 
We have shown that the use of contextual infor- 
mation in different system modules may reduce the 
recognition errors, and increase the usability of tele- 
phone human-computer dialogue. 
7 Acknowledgements  
The work of the first and the second authors was 
partially supported by the LE3-4229 project, ARISE 
(Automatic Railway Information System for Eu- 
rope), promoted by the Commissions of the Euro- 
pean Communities, DG XIII (Telecommunications, 
Information Market and Exploitation of Research). 
The third author is a researcher of ICI (Institutul de 
Cercetari n Informatica, Bucarest, Romania): the 
work reported in this paper was implemented while 
she was visiting CSELT. 
Re ferences  
Albesano, Dario, Paolo Baggia, Morena Danieli, 
Roberto Gemello, Elisabetta Gerbino, and Clau- 
dio Rullent. 1997. A Robust System for Human- 
Machine Dialogue in Telephony-Based Applica- 
tions. In International Journal of Speech Tech- 
nology, Kluwer Academic Publishers. To appear. 
Allen, James F., Bradford W. Miller, Eric K. Ring- 
ger, Teresa Sikorski. 1996. A Robust System for 
Natural Spoken Dialogue. In Proceedings of the 
34th annual Meeting of the A CL, Santa Cruz, Cal- 
ifornia. Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics, Morristown, New Jersey. 
Bernsen Niels O., Laila Dybkjaer, and Hans Dy- 
bkjaer. 1996. User Errors in Spoken Human- 
Machine Dialogue. In Proceedings of the ECAI- 
95 Workshop on Spoken Language Systems, Bu- 
dapest, Hungary. 
Billi, Roberto, Giuseppe Castagneri, and Morena 
Danieli. 1997. Field trial evaluations of two differ- 
ent information inquiry systems. In Speech Com- 
munications. To appear. 
Danieli, Morena. 1996. On the Use of Expectations 
for Detecting and Repairing Human-Machine Mis- 
communications. In Proceedings of AAAI-96 
Workshop on Detecting, Preventing and Repair- 
ing Human.Machine Miscommunications, Port- 
land, OR., pages 
Danieli, Morena and Elisabetta Gerbino. 1995. 
Metrics for evaluating dialogue strategies in a spo- 
ken language system. In Proceedings of the 1995 
AAAI Spring Symposium on Empirical Methods 
in Discourse Interpretation and Generation, pages 
34-39. 
119 
Grice, Paul H. 1967. Logic and Conversation. In 
Cole, P., and Morgan, J. eds. 1975. Syntax and Se- 
maniics, New York and London: Academic Press. 
Hirst, Graeme, Susan McRoy, Peter Heeman, 
Philip Edmonds, Diane Horton. 1994. Repair- 
ing conversational misunderstandings and non- 
understandings. In Speech Communication, vol- 
ume 15, pages 213-229. 
Lamel Lori, Jean Luc Gauvain, Samir K. Bennacef, 
Laurence Devillers, Saliha Foukia, Jean-Jacques 
Gangolf, and Sophie Rosset. 1996. Field Tri- 
als of a Telephone Service for Rail Travel Infor- 
mation. In Proceedings of IVTTA-1996, IEEE 
Third Workshop Interactive Voice Technology for 
Telecommunications Applications, Basking Ridge, 
New Jersey. 
Popovici, Cosmin and Paolo Baggia. 1997. Spe- 
cialized Language Models Using Dialogue Predic- 
tions. In Proceedings of ICCASP-97, Munchen, 
Germany. 
Schegloff, Emanuel A. 1992. Repair after next turn: 
The last structurally provided efense of intersub- 
jectivity in conversation. In American Journal of 
Sociology, Volume 97, Number 5, pages 1295-1345 
120 
