Pragmatics and AAC approaches to conversational goals 
John Todman 
Department of Psychology 
University of Dundee 
Dundee, DD1 4HN 
Scotland, UK  
j. t odman@dundee,  ac. uk 
Norman Aim 
Applied Computing Division 
University of Dundee 
Dundee, DD1 4HN 
Scotland, UK 
nalm@mic,  dundee, ac. uk 
Abstract 
The modelling of pragmatic features of 
natural conversation to help AAC users 
achieve a range of social conversational 
goals is considered in relation to the devel- 
opment of an AAC system based on text 
pre-storage and retrieval. Problems facing 
designers of AAC systems are highlighted 
in the hope that insights from NLP may 
contribute to solutions. 
1 Conversational goals 
People have a variety of implicit and explicit goals 
when engaging in conversation, among which a 
broad distinction between social goals and goals con- 
cerned with "getting things done" can be discerned. 
For example, Cheepen's (Cheepen, 1988) distinction 
between transactional goals and interactional goals 
has considerable overlap with Hobbs and Evans' 
(Hobbs and Evans, 1980) ideational and interper- 
sonal categories. 
On one hand, transactional and ideational goals 
are broadly applicable to contexts in which some- 
thing external to the conversation is "being done" 
(e.g. evolving plans, engaging in a task) and, on 
the other hand, interpersonal and interactional goals 
tend to predominate when the focus is on social as- 
pects of the conversation itself. We will use the 
labels "transactional" and "social" to refer to this 
broad distinction. 
Goals concerned with getting things done in the 
world, the transactional goals, may range from get- 
ting a snack prepared to your liking, through plan- 
ning an outing, to gaining a qualification. In gen- 
eral, the successful achievement of such goals will 
rely heavily on the accurate transmission of infor- 
mation during the reievant communication episodes. 
For these "message oriented" goals, as Brown and 
Yule (Brown and Yule, 1983) describe them, preci- 
sion of meaning in the content of the conversation is 
likely to be crucial. 
For social goals, on the other hand, described by 
Brown and Yule as "listener oriented", precision of 
conversational content may sometimes be less impor- 
tant than aspects of delivery, especially timing. As 
with transactional goals, social goals may range from 
the immediate, such as enjoyment of a social inter- 
action or making a favourable impression, to longer 
term goals such as the development of relationships 
or self esteem. 
Short and long-term goals may, of course, both be 
active with respect o the same conversation, with 
short-term goals contributing to longer-term goals, 
which, in turn, contribute to very long-term goals 
such as "quality of life" and "self-fulfilment". Sim- 
ilarly, conversations are not necessarily exclusively 
concerned with either social goals or transactional 
goals. For example, a casual chat may contain trans- 
actional components such as arranging future joint 
activities. Conversely, a basically transactional con- 
versation with a shop assistant may include some 
social chat. Nonetheless, the broad distinction be- 
tween conversations motivated primarily by social 
goals and those motivated primarily by transactional 
goals can be sustained. 
2 AAC design approaches 
For people who are unable to speak, most high-tech. 
AAC systems aim to help them to communicate us- 
ing synthesized speech. This can be approached ei- 
ther by means of pre-storing complete phrases ready 
for retrieval and output in a subsequent interaction 
or by constructing phrases at the time they are re- 
quired during an interaction. Most current AAC 
systems have been designed using a predominantly 
phrase-construction approach in order to maximize 
the flexibility of speech output. In these phrase- 
construction systems it is common for some sort of 
prediction to be incorporated to ease and speed the 
task of entering content and for provision to be made 
for storage of a few frequently used messages. 
It is implicit in this approach that the precision of 
expression attainable with flexible phrase construc- 
tion at the time a thought occurs is the paramount 
consideration. Pre-storage ofphrases i , in this view, 
seen as suitable only for passing simple, frequently 
used messages, for very routine exchanges such as 
greetings and good-byes and for delivery of non- 
interactional monologue, as in giving an address. 
Pre-stored phrases are not generally considered suit- 
able for the conduct of free-flowing social conver- 
sation, where it is assumed that subtle nuances of 
meaning need to be constructed as the conversation 
proceeds in directions that could not have been fore- 
seen. 
This view of social conversation may, however, 
be misleading in its disregard of the range of goals 
that motivate such interactions. If the main point 
of a conversation is simply to enjoy the social in- 
teraction, it has to be asked whether the conversa- 
tion will be more enjoyable with long pauses while 
each "ideal" utterance is constructed orwith roughly 
"appropriate" utterances that are delivered without 
long pauses preceding them. Similarly, it may be 
asked which of these scenarios is more likely to re- 
sult in an attribution of, say, competence or, in the 
longer term, to have a positive effect on an AAC 
user's elf-esteem, status or independence. 
Certainly, users of high tech. AAC systems com- 
plain more about the slowness of their speech out- 
put than about any restrictions limiting the preci- 
sion with which their thoughts can be expressed. 
This is not just because most users are working 
with phrase-construction systems, which do not im- 
pose restrictions on precision (except hose due to 
time constraints). In a recent study, Todman and 
Lewins (Todman and Lewins, 1996) trained a non- 
speaking person to use a text storage and retrieval 
AAC device to engage in free-flowing conversation at
? a rate of output (counting search times) almost 10 
times faster than her output using her usual phrase- 
construction system. The critical finding was that 
the faster her speech output in a particular conver- 
sation, the more pleasurable that conversation was 
rated by both the user and her conversational part- 
ners. This is consistent with what is known of the 
disruption caused by long pauses in natural conver- 
sation (McLaughlin and Cody, 1982). 
Another feature of natural conversation that has 
an important bearing on which general approach to 
the design of AAC systems (i.e. phrase-construction 
or phrase-storage) is more likely to help users to 
achieve their conversational goals is the imprecision 
of much conversational content. Wyer and Gruen- 
feld (Wyer and Gruenfeld, 1995) argue, for example, 
that "if-then" production rules suffice to produce ac- 
ceptable routine responses to many of the things a 
conversational partner may say, and Langer (Langer, 
1978) provides evidence that carefully considered, 
precise responses are the exception rather than the 
rule. Responses need to be "appropriate" but they 
do not need to be "ideal" or precise to meet partic- 
ipants' goals in much social conversation. 
People who are unable to speak tend to be so- 
cially isolated. Social goals are therefore likely to 
be particularly salient for them. Therefore, the de- 
velopment of AAC devices capable of supporting a
reasonable approximation to natural social conver- 
sation should be a high priority for AAC design- 
ers. However, casual social conversation, with it's 
free-ranging content and its dependence on speed 
of responding, presents a considerable challenge. It 
seems reasonably clear that AAC systems based on 
phrase-construction areunable to meet some of the 
social goals that users are likely to have. Although 
there are substantial difficulties to be overcome in 
the development of phrase-storage systems, their po- 
tential for outputting responses relatively quickly 
suggests that they may be capable of meeting at 
least some of the more immediate social goals of 
AAC users. When the aim is to develop an aid for 
social conversation, there seem to be good reasons 
for adopting a basically phrase-storage approach. 
A predominantly phrase-storage system will need 
features that deal with the impossibility of antici- 
pating precisely what phrases will be needed in a 
subsequent conversation and with the added diffi- 
culty of locating stored phrases for output (Light 
et al , 1990). Furthermore, to produce an effec- 
tive AAC system, even for just social conversation, 
phrase-construction features will need to be incorpo- 
rated within the basically phrase-storage system. A 
reasonable way of approaching the design issues is to 
consider what pragmatic features of natural conver- 
sation seem to support various goals that the par- 
ticipants may have, with a view to modelling such 
features in the AAC system. 
3 P ragmat ic  features  o f  natura l  
conversat ion  
The need for responses generally to be appropriate 
and fast rather than ideal and slow has already been 
discussed. Sometimes, however, it will be necessary 
to generate a unique response. Recycled, imprecise 
responses will not do when specific information is 
2 
requested. Again, participants have to be able to 
cope with the unexpected. Generating a unique re- 
sponse may be one way of doing this but it is by no 
means the only strategy that is effective in natural 
conversation. People frequently respond in a rather 
general way, make "hedging" comments o gain time 
or explicitly defer discussion of the topic to a later 
occasion. 
The general requirement for speed of output 
bears on some other features of natural conversa- 
tion that are speed-dependent to varying degrees. 
Co-operative efforts are required to maintain flow, 
with the orderly development of topic being man- 
aged by means of topic shifts that are small enough 
to maintain continuity, with occasional larger shifts 
to establish new directions. Another way in which 
co-operation is evident in natural social conversation 
is in the sharing of control of topic direction. Indeed, 
Cheepen (Cheepen, 1988) has argued that this is a 
defining feature of interactional (i.e. social) conver- 
sation. Participants in natural social conversation 
further demonstrate heir co-operative involvement 
with frequent positive feedback while a partner is 
making an extended contribution to the conversa- 
tion and by means of repair strategies when things 
go wrong, threatening breakdown of the conversa- 
tion. 
These pragmatic aspects of natural conversation 
contribute in different degrees to the various short 
and long-term social goals of participants. It is 
important to incorporate features within an AAC 
design which, by modelling such aspects of natu- 
ral conversation, will help users to pursue their so- 
cial goals more effectively than has been possible so 
far. The first requirement is to develop a basically 
phrase-storage system that emphasizes speed of out- 
put and models other speed-dependent features of 
natural conversation (i.e. maintenance of flow, share 
in control, feedback, repair). This will be particu- 
larly important for meeting immediate social goals, 
such as enjoyment of the interaction and creation of 
a favourable impression, which is essential if the user 
is to remain motivated to use the aid to have social 
conversation. 
The next requirement is for design features that 
model those aspects of natural conversation that are 
particularly content-dependent (i.e.uniqueness, ap- 
propriateness, coping with the unexpected). These 
content-dependent features are needed, together 
with the speed-dependent features, to meet longer- 
term goals such as those concerned with the de- 
velopment of relationships, participation i  activi- 
ties, status, self-esteem and independence. Although 
content-dependent features of conversation can be 
modelled to some extent within a phrase-storage 
approach, this will have to be supplemented by a 
phrase-construction c mponent. 
The proposed relationships between AAC design 
approaches, pragmatic aspects of natural conversa- 
tion and short and long-term conversational goals 
are illustrated in Figure 1. As an example of how 
the design of an AAC system can be guided by the 
joint consideration of these variables, the develop- 
ment of a conversation aid known as "TALK" (Tod- 
man, Alm, and Elder, 1994) will be described. 
4 The  TALK sys tem 
The TALK system was developed in order to ex- 
periment with a number of ways of achieving con- 
versational goals more easily using an AAC system. 
From the development ofa number of previous pro- 
totype systems, some important lessons had been 
learned. Ways of providing an AAC user with rapid 
and effective speech acts for opening and closing a 
conversation have been devised (Alm, Newell, and 
Arnott, 1987). The importance of backchannelling 
in communication has been recognised and a way 
of providing quick-fire comments has also been de- 
veloped (Alto, Arnott, and Newell, 1992a). Several 
different approaches had been taken to assisting an 
AAC user to handle the central part of a conversa- 
tion. A text database of conversational material has 
shown the effectiveness of labelling stored items with 
their pragmatic as well as their semantic aspects, 
but proved difficult o use in practice without ime- 
consuming construction of retrieval requests (Alm, 
Arnott, and Newell, 1989). Attempts to provide a 
degree of prediction of conversational material have 
included using narrative sequences (Alm, Arnott, 
and Newell, 1992b); (Waller, 1992), taking the par- 
ticipants' personal characteristics and interests into 
account (Broumley et al, 1990), and using fuzzy 
information retrieval techniques (Alm, Nicol, anct 
Newell, 1993). 
From all this work, together with the body of re- 
search into discourse and conversation, it was ap- 
parent hat a simple, though partial, model of con- 
versational interaction could be constructed. Given 
the incomplete nature of knowledge about conver- 
sational structure, such a model would of course be 
at best a good guess, but it could help clarify our 
thinking about how to build more effective systems 
for helping AAC users to accomplish conversational 
goals. The suggested model we have arrived at is 
shown in Figure 2. 
The opening and closing of a conversation can be 
done according to a fairly well set out routine. In 
the central part of the conversation, the conversa- 
AAC approaches 
phrase 
construction 
most 
compatible 
phrase 
storage 
most compatible 
pragmatic 
features of conversation 
uniqueness 
I.,ro,r--.} 
~_ coping with 
unexpected ~,, 
pair 
staying in touch } 
short-term 
GOALS 
{.h'r.o.ontro} I'mpre--'onJ 
\[ mSio~t~:~vnc e \] ~ .  { enjoyment } 
r projecting 
r speed 1 L pers?nalitYJ 
medium-term long-term 
y 
r 
{ relationships \] 
{ . . , . . , . .m } 
.,.,u. } 
? I r participati?n L in activities 1 
{independence} I quality 1 of life 
? fulfilment 
Figure 1: A model inking AAC design approaches, pragmatic features of conversation and user goals 
tionalist is either speaking or listening. This is of 
course an oversimplification, since overlapping talk 
is in fact the norm. More accurately, we could say 
that the conversationalist  either leading the di- 
rection of the conversation or is following the other 
person's lead. When another is speaking, the conver- 
sationalist needs a quickly available supply of feed- 
back remarks to express their reactions. When the 
conversational lead is being taken, they will need a 
way of speaking on a topic, and changing topics. 
The TALK system incorporated features from an 
earlier prototype to handle opening and closing a 
conversation and giving quick feedback easily (Alm, 
Arnott, and Newell, 1992a). With the TALK pro- 
totype two important new features were introduced: 
a method of dealing with topic shift, and the inclu- 
sion of another important category of speech act: 
context-sensitive comments. 
The easy handling of topic shift is a major prob- 
lem for users of an AAC system. Given the slowness 
of operation, and the potential complexity of a sys- 
tem which could handle large amounts of text, some 
sort of predictive or assistive mechanism will be nec- 
essary to make topic shifting a realistic possibility. 
Such a capability would be important for achieving 
appropriate speed and maintenance of flow. Also, 
topic shift is a key method of sharing in the control 
of the conversational direction. 
The TALK system handled topic shift by provid- 
ing users with three sets of conversational perspec- 
tives. The user could shift these perspectives with 
one activation of an on-screen button. The perspec- 
tives were: 
Person: Me, You 
Time: Past, Present, Future 
Orientation: Where, What, How, When, Who, Why. 
By altering one of these perspectives the user 
called up a new set of candidate texts for speak- 
ing reflecting that perspective. For example, to 
shift from a screen displaying content related to how 
things had occured in the user's past (me/how/past) 
to a screen containing content related to how things 
Io -I 
variety of aspects of topic discussion ' /  
speak on 
a topic 
I  ive feedb,ok 
| to another | 
~,. speaker ) 
)Iclosers I 
Figure 2: A simple and incomplete model of conversational interaction 
occurred in the partner's past (you/how/past), the 
"You" button would be activated. Making a series 
of these selections took the conversation through the 
step-like progression from one topic to another which 
coherent conversations require (Button and Casey, 
1984). 
The TALK user had available a set of on-screen 
buttons with which to produce quick-fire responses 
to what another person was saying. These assisted 
in maintaining speed, giving appropriate feedback 
to another speaker and being able to effect repairs. 
The responses available were: 
Acknowledge 
Say yes, Say no, Say don't know 
Agree, Disagree 
Evaluate good, Evaluate bad 
Interrupt, Say thanks, Ask for expansion 
Say wait a minute (stall for time) 
Say a mistake was made in speaking. 
In order to maximise the speed of response, these 
phrases were spoken when the button was activated, 
without recourse to a menu of possible choices. A 
random variation was built in to avoid too much 
repetition of exactly the same words. For example, 
a set of alternative "acknowledge" responses might 
be "Uh-huh", "Yeah", "I see", "Yeah, yeah", "Yeah, 
uh huh". This was in keeping withthe principle that 
in this case speed of response was the key issue, and 
if the phrase was not exactly what was required, an 
approximation to the wording needed would in any 
case be sufficient. 
From early trials of the TALK system, the need 
for another category of speech act emerged. Often 
it is important o provide a comment which does 
need to be selected from a menu of possibilities, be- 
cause its use is dependent on the context. Also there 
are reusable phrases which serve to move the con- 
versation forward and which, although suitable as 
responses to many different hings a partner might 
say, need to be selected specifically. These phrases 
we called "context-sensitive comments" (Todman, 
Aim, and Elder, 1994). We experimented with a 
number of different ypes of comment and, though 
the set that finally went into TALK was by no means 
a definitive one, the list of comment categories given. 
below, with an example of each, was found to be 
useful (Todman and Morrison, 1995) and added to 
the flexibility of the system: 
Aphorism (e.g. "That's how life goes sometimes") 
Expression of sympathy (e.g. "Sorry to hear that") 
Hedge (e.g. "I don't really remember") 
Apology (e.g. "Sorry, I didn't think of that") 
Question ("How about you?") 
Specific feedback ("That's really interesting") 
These context-sensitive comments, like the quick- 
fire phrases, helped with speed, maintenance offlow, 
and having a share of the control of the conversa- 
tion. They also provided a better way of respond- 
ing appropriately to the unexpected than the more 
general-purpose quick-fire remarks. 
Some initial testing of TALK was performed in 
which only pre-stored text was used, in order to ex- 
amine the limits of speaking entirely with pre-stored 
material. A facility for adding unique text for speak- 
ing during a conversation was then added. The use 
of this feature, of course, involves the user in a sig- 
nificant time penalty. 
In trials, the TALK system has shown that incor- 
porating the modelling of pragmatic features of con- 
versation can produce improved results in computer- 
aided communication. Significant increases in speed 
are possible. One physically disabled non-speaking 
person using TALK achieved a speaking rate of 
about 67 words per minute (Todman et al , 1995). 
This represents a considerable increase on the 2-10 
words per minute which is the current norm (Beukel- 
man and Mirenda, 1992). 
In a study analysing the quality of the content 
of TALK-aided conversations compared with con- 
versations on the same topic carried out by natural 
speakers, the content of the computer-aided conver- 
sations was rated significantly higher than that of 
the unaided samples (p < .001) (Todman, Elder, 
and Alm, 1995). This was an encouraging finding 
indicating that using pre-stored material could actu- 
ally enhance the perceived quality of conversational 
content. 
Currently two AAC users are taking part in a 
long-term evaluation of the usefulness of the TALK 
prototype in their daily conversations, and a third 
AAC user is evaluating a version of TALK which 
has been adapted for people with limited literacy 
skills. From these informal evaluations, the users 
report that using the prototype has given them con- 
versational opportunities they would not otherwise 
have had. Two of the users have given a number of 
public lectures, using the TALK system to deliver 
the lecture and deal with the following question and 
answer sessions (Grant, 1995); (McGregor, 1995); 
(Todman and Grant, 1996). Such applications of 
the system have a clear relationship to the commu- 
nicational goals of mutual enjoyment and enhance- 
ment of the perceived status of the speaker. These 
longitudinal long-term studies continue. 
A number of improvements suggest hemselves 
to further enhance the usability of systems uch as 
TALK. The prototype models several aspects of the 
pragmatics of conversation, but no doubt there are 
other aspects which could be helpfully incorporated. 
As can be seen in Figure 3, the interface is quite 
complex at present. Introducing predictive features 
could help to simplify the control task for the user. 
It may be that work currently underway in the field 
of natural anguage processing can be of assistance 
in suggesting ways to accomplish this task. 
References 
Norman Aim, Alan Newell, John L. Arnott. 1987. A 
communication aid which models conversational 
patterns. In Proceedings of the lOth Annual Con- 
ference of the Rehabilitation Engineers Society of 
North America, pages 127-129. 
Norman Aim, John L. Arnott, Alan Newell. 1989. 
Database design for storing and accessing per- 
sonal conversational material. In Proceedings of 
the 12th Annual Conference of the Rehabilitation 
Engineers Society of North America, pages 147- 
148. 
Norman Alm, John L. Arnott, Alan Newell. 1992a. 
Prediction and conversational momentum in an 
augmentative communication system. Communi- 
cations of the ACM, 35:46-57. 
Norman Aim, John L. Arnott, Alan Newell. 1992b. 
Evaluation of a text-based communication sys- 
tem for increasing conversational participation 
and control. In Proceedings of the 15th Rehabili- 
tation Engineers Society of North America Inter- 
national Conference, pages 366-368. 
Norman Aim, M. Nicol, Alan Newell. 1993. The ap- 
plication of fuzzy set theory to the storage and re- 
trieval of conversational texts in an augmentative 
communication system. Proceedings of RESNA 
'93, pages 127-129. 
David Beukelman and Pat Mirenda. 1992. Augmen- 
tative and Alternative Communication: Manage- 
ment of Severe Communication Disorders in Chil- 
dren and Adults. Paul Brookes Publishing Com- 
pany, Baltimore, Maryland. 
Liz Broumley, John L. Arnott, Alaistair Y Cairns., 
and Alan F. Newell. 1990. TalksBack: An ap- 
plication of artificial intelligence techniques to a 
communication prosthesis for non-speaking peo- 
ple. In Proceedings of the European Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 117- 119. 
G. Brown and G. Yule. 1983. Teaching the Spo- 
ken Language. Cambridge University Press, Cam- 
bridge. 
G. Button and N. Casey. 1984. Generating topic: 
the use of topic-initial elicitors. In J. Atkins and 
J. Heritage, editors, Structures of Social Action- 
Studies in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, London. 
C. Cheepen. 1988. The Predictability of Informal 
Conversation. Pinter Publishers, London. 
Sylvia Grant. 1995. Using TALK. Communication 
Matters, 9:22-25. 
J. R. Hobbs and D. A. Evans. 1980. Conversation as 
planned behavior. Cognitive Science, 4:349-377. 
E J. Langer. 1978. Rethinking the role of thought 
in social interaction. In J. Harvey, W. Ickes, and 
R. Kidd, editors, New directions in Attribution 
Research, 2:35-58, Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, 
New Jersey. 
J. Light, P. Lindsey, L. Siegel, L. and P. Parnes. 
1990. The effects of message encoding tech- 
niques on recall by literate adults using AAC sys- 
tems. Augmentative and Alternative Communica- 
tion, 6:184-201. 
Alan McGregor. 1995. A voice for the fu- 
ture. In Proceedings of the European Conference 
on the Advancement of Rehabilitation Technology 
(ECART '95), pages 127-129, Lisbon, Portugal, 
October. 
M. L. McLaughlin and M. J. Cody. 1982. Awk- 
ward silences: Behavioral antecedents and conse- 
quences of the conversational l pse. Human Com- 
munication Research, 8:299-316. 
John Todman, Norman Alto, and Leona Elder. 
1994. Computer-aided conversation: a prototype 
system for non-speaking people with physical dis- 
abilities. Applied Psycholinguistics, 15:45-73. 
John Todman, Leona Elder, and Norman Aim. 
1995. An evaluation of the content of computer- 
aided conversations. Augmentative and Alterna- 
tive Communication, 11:229-234. 
John Todman and Sylvia Grant. 1996. Conversa- 
tion using an AAC system based on pre-stored 
text. In Proceedings of the 8th Biennial Confer- 
ence of the International Society for Augmentative 
and Alternative Communication, pages 169-170, 
Vancouver, Canada, August. 
John Todman and Elizabeth Lewins. 1996. Use of 
an AAC system for casual conversation by a non- 
vocal person with cerebral palsy. In Proceedings of 
the 7th Biennial Conference of the International 
Society for Augmentative and Alternative Com- 
munication, pages 167-168, Vancouver, Canada. 
August. 
John Todman, Elizabeth Lewins, Norman Aim, and 
Leona Elder. 1995. Use of a communication aid 
(TALK) by a non-speaking person with cerebral 
palsy. Communication Matters, 9:18-21. 
John Todman and Zara Morrison. 1995. The use 
of non-specific comments in a conversation aid for 
non-speaking people. International Journal of Re- 
habilitation Research, 18:68-69. 
Annalu Waller. 1992 Providing Narratives in an 
Augmentative Communication System. Ph.D. 
Thesis. University of Dundee, Scotland. 
R.S. Wyer and D.H. Gruenfeld 1995. Information 
processing in interpersonal communication. In 
D.E. Hewes, editor, The Cognitive Bases of Inter- 
personal Communication, pages 19-47, Lawrence 
Erlbanm, HiUsdale, N.J. 
7 
Figure 3: The TALK interface 
