Word Sense Disambiguation for Acquisition of Selectional 
Preferences 
Diana McCarthy 
Cognitive & Computing Sciences 
University of Sussex 
Brighton BN1 9QH, UK 
diana, mccarth y~ cogs.susx, ac. uk 
7th May 1997 
Abstract 
The selectional preferences of verbal predicates are 
an important component of lexical information use- 
ful for a number of NLP tasks including disambiglia- 
tion of word senses. Approaches to selectional pref- 
erence acquisition without word sense disambigua- 
tion are reported to be prone to errors arising from 
erroneous word senses. Large scale automatic se- 
mantic tagging of texts in sufficient quantity for 
preference acquisition has received little attention as 
most research in word sense disambiguation has con- 
centrated on quality word sense disambiguation f
a handful of target words. The work described here 
concentrates on adapting semantic tagging methods 
that do not require a massive overhead of manual 
semantic tagging and that strike a reasonable com- 
promise between accuracy and cost so that large 
amounts of text can be tagged relatively quickly. 
The results of some of these adaptations are de- 
scribed here along with a comparison of the selec- 
tional preferences acquired with and without one of 
these methods. Results of a bootstrapping approach 
are also outlined in which the preferences obtained 
are used for coarse grained sense disambiguation a d 
then the partially disambiguated data is fed back 
into the preference acquisition system. 1 
1This work was supported by CEC Telematics Appli- 
cations Programme project LE1-2111 "SPARKLE: Shal- 
low PARsing and Knowledge xtraction for Language 
Engineering". 
1 Introduction 
The automatic acquisition of lexical information is
widely seen as a way of overcoming the bottleneck 
of producing NLP applications (Zernik, 1991). The 
selectional preferences that predicates have for their 
arguments provide useful information that can help 
with resolution of both lexical and structural ambi- 
guity and anaphora s well as being important for 
identifying the underlying semantic roles in argu- 
ment slots. 
The work reported here concentrates on acquisi- 
tion for verbal predicates since verbs are of such ob- 
vious importance for the lexicon. However it could 
also be applied to any other type of predication. 
The main contribution of this work is that it uses 
shallow parses produced by a fully automatic parser 
and that some word sense disambiguation (WSD) 
is performed on the heads collected from these 
parses. Most current research on selectional prefer- 
ence acquisition has used the Penn Treebank parses 
(Resnik, 1993a, 1993b; Ribas, 1995; Li & Abe, 1995; 
Abe & Li, 1996) These are obtained semi- automati- 
cally with a deterministic parser and manual correc- 
tion. Additionally the other approaches do not per- 
form any WSD on the input data and most report 
a major source of error arising from the contribu- 
tion of erroneous senses ometimes giving incorrect 
preferences and at other times a noticeable ffect of 
over-generalisation (Ribas, 1995; Resnik, 1993a). 
The relationship between selectional preference 
acquisition and WSD is a circular one. One poten- 
tial use of selectional preferences i  WSD yet their 
acquisition appears to require disarabiguated data. 
There are ways of breaking this circle. This pa- 
52 
per describes work comparing the preferences ac- 
quired with and without semantic tagging of the in- 
put data. The cost of word sense disambiguation 
is kept low enough to permit tagging of a sufficient 
quantity of data. An iterative approach is also out- 
lined whereby the preferences so acquired are used 
to disambiguate he argument heads which are then 
fed back into the preference acquisition system. 
It is hoped that with enough data erroneous 
senses can be filtered out as noise (Li & Abe, 1995). 
However tagged data should produce more appro- 
priate selectional restrictions provided the tagging 
is sufficiently accurate. Tagging should be particu- 
larly useful in cases where the data is scarce. 
2 Previous Work 
2.1 Se lec t iona l  p re ference  acqu is i t ion  
Other approaches to selectional preference ac- 
quisition closely related to this are those of 
Resnik (Resnik, 1993b, 1993a) Ribas (1994, 1995), 
and Li and Abe (Li & Abe, 1995; Abe & Li, 1996) 2. 
All use a class based approach using the WordNet 
hypernym hierarchy (Beckwith, Felbaum, Gross, & 
Miller, 1991) as the noun classification and find- 
ing selectional preferences as sets of disjoint noun 
classes (not related as descendants of one another) 
within the hierarchy. The key to obtaining good 
selectional preferences is obtaining classes at an ap- 
propriate level of generalisation. These researchers 
also use variations on the association score given in 
equation 1, the log of which gives the measure from 
information theory known as mutual information. 
This measures the "relatedness" between two words, 
or in the class-based work on selectional preferences 
between a class (c) and the predicate (v). 
A(c, v) = P(clv) p(c) (1) 
In comparison to the conditional distribution 
p(clv ) of the predicate (v) and noun class (c) the 
association score takes into account the marginal 
distribution of the noun class so that higher values 
are not obtained because the noun happens to occur 
2I shall refer to the work in papers (Li & Abe, 1995) and 
(Abe & Li, 1996) as "Li and Abe" throughout, since the two 
pieces of work relate to each other and both involve the same 
two authors 
more frequently irrespective of context. The condi- 
tional distribution might, for example, bias a class 
containing "people" as the direct object of "fly" in 
comparison to the class of "BIRDS" simply because 
the "PEOPLE" class occurs more in the corpus to 
start with. 
l~esnik and Pdbas both search for disjoint classes 
with the highest score. Since smaller classes will fit 
the predicate better and will hence have a higher 
association value they scale up the mutual informa- 
tion value by the conditional distribution giving the 
association score in equation 2. The conditional dis- 
tribution will be larger for larger classes and so in 
this way they hope to obtain an appropriate l vel of 
generallsation. 
A(v,c) P(clv) = e(clvl log 1- (21 
The work described here uses the approach of Li 
and Abe who rather than modifying the association 
score use a principle of data compression from infor- 
mation theory to find the appropriate l vel of gen- 
eralisation. This principle is known as the Mini- 
mum Description Length (MDL) principle. In their 
approach selectional preferences are represented as 
a set of classes or a "tree cut" across the hierar- 
chy which dominates all the leaf nodes exhaustively 
and disjointly. The tree cut features in a model, 
termed an "association tree cut model" (ATCM) 
which identifies an association score for each of the 
classes in the cut. In the MDL principle the best 
model is taken to be the one that minimises the 
sum of: 
1. The Model Description Length - the number of 
bits to encode the model 
2. The Data Description Length - the number of 
bits to encode the data in the model. 
In this way, rather than searching for the classes 
with the highest association score, MDL searches 
for the classes which make the best compromise be- 
tween explaining the data well by having a high as- 
sociation score and providing as simple (general) a 
model as possible and so minimising the model de- 
scription length. 
In all the systems described above the input is not 
disambiguated with respect o word senses. Resnik 
and Ribas both report erroneous word senses being 
a major source of error. Ribas explains that this 
53 
occurs because some individual nouns occur partic- 
ularly frequently as complements to a given verb and 
so all senses of these nouns also get unusually high 
frequencies. 
Li and Abe place a threshold on class frequencies 
before consideration fa class. In this way they hope 
to avoid the noise from erroneous enses. In this 
paper some modifications to Li and Abe's system 
are described and a comparison is made of the use 
of some word sense disambiguation. 
2.2 Word  Sense D isambiguat ion  
Since the literature on WSD is vast there will be no 
attempt to describe the variety of current work here. 
Two approaches were investigated as possible 
ways for pretagging the head nouns that are used as 
input to the preference acquisition system. These 
were selected for having a low enough cost to enable 
tagging of a sufficient amount of text. 
One strategy has been suggested by Wilks and 
Stevenson i which the most frequent sense is picked 
regardless of context. In this work they distinguish 
senses to the homograph level given the correct part 
of speech and report a 95% accuracy using the most 
frequent sense specified by LDOCE ranking. This 
approach as the advantage of simplicity and train- 
ing data is only needed for the estimation of one 
parameter, the sense frequencies. 
The other approach selected was Yarowsky's un- 
supervised algorithm (1995). This has the advan- 
tage that it does not require any manually tagged 
data. His approach relies on initial seed collocations 
to discriminate senses that can be observed in a por- 
tion of the data. This portion is then labelled ac- 
cordingly. New collocations are extracted from the 
labeUed sample and ordered by log-likelihood as in 
equation 3. The new ordered collocations are then 
used to relable the data and the system iterates be- 
tween observing and ordering new collocations and 
re-labelling the data until the stopping condition is 
met. The final decision list of collocations can then 
be used at run-time. 
p(senseAlcoll,) 
log-likelihood = log p(other_sensesicoll, ) (3) 
3 Experiments 
3.1 Word  Sense D isambiguat ion  
Preliminary experiments have been carried out us- 
ing adaptations of the two approaches mentioned 
above. 
3.1.1 Experiment 1 
This experiment followed the approach of using the 
first sense regardless of context. Wilks and Steven- 
son did this in order to disambiguate LDOCE ho- 
mographs. Distinguishing between WordNet senses 
is a much harder problem and so performance was 
not expected to be as good. 
The only frequency information available for 
WordNet senses, assuming large scale manual tag- 
ging is out of the question, is the portion of the 
Brown corpus that has been semantically tagged 
with WordNet senses for the SemCor project (Miller, 
Leacock, Tengi, & Bunker, 1993). Criteria were used 
alongside this frequency data specifying when to use 
the first sense and when to leave the ambiguity un- 
touched. Two criteria were used initially: 
1. Fi~EQ - a threshold on the frequency of the first 
sense 
. RATIO - a threshold ratio between the frequen- 
cies of the first sense and next most frequent 
sense. 
At first FREQ was set at 5 and RATIO at 2. 
The method was then evaluated against he man- 
ually tagged sample of the Brown corpus (200,000 
words of text) from which the frequency data was 
obtained and two small manually tagged samples 
from the LOB corpus (sample size of nouns 179) 
and the Wall Street Journal corpus (size 191 nouns). 
The results are shown in table 1. As expected the 
performance was superior when scored against he 
same data from which the frequency estimates had 
been taken. 
Further experimentation was performed using the 
LOB sample and varying FREQ and RATIO. Ad- 
ditionally a third constraint was added (D). In this 
nouns identified on the SemCor project as being dif- 
ficult for humans to tag were ignored. 
The results are shown in table 2. Although the re- 
suits indicate this is rather a limited method of dis- 
ambiguating it was hoped that it would improve the 
54 
Table 1: Threshold 5 ratio 2 
DATA RECALL PRECISION 
Brown 61 86 
LOB(179) 
WSJ (191) 
44 
41 
69 
68 
Table 2: Variation of thresholds on the LOB data 
CRITERIA "l RECALL PRECISION 
freq 5 ratio 2 44 69 
freq 3 ratio 2 47 69 
freq 1 ratio 2 49 67 
freq 3 ratio 1.5 50 67 
freq 3 ratio 3 39 76 
freq 3 ratio 2 (D) 45 71 
selectional preference acquisition process whilst also 
avoiding a heavy cost in terms of human time (for 
manual tagging) or computer time (for unsupervised 
training). For the selectional preference acquisition 
experiments 4 and 6 described below it was decided 
to use the criteria FREQ 3, RATIO 2 and D (ignore 
difficult nouns). 
3.1.2 Experiment 2 
Yarowksy's unsupervised algorithm (1995) was also 
investigated using WordNet to generate the initial 
seed collocations. This has the advantage that it 
does not rely on a quantity of handtagged data how- 
ever the time taken for training remains an issue. 
Without optimisation the algorithm took 15 min- 
utes of elapsed time for 710 citations of the word 
"plant". Accuracy was reasonable considering a) 
the quantity of data used (a corpus of 90 million 
words compared with Yarowsky's 460 million) and 
b) the simplifications made, imparticular the use of 
only one type of collocation. 3
On initial experimentation it was evident that 
predominant senses quickly became favoured. For 
this reason the measure to order the decision list 
3The only collocation used was within a window of 10 
words either side of the target. Other simplifications include 
the use of a constant for smoothing, a rudimentary stopping 
condition, no use of the one sense per discourse strategy and 
no alteration of the parameters at run time. 
was changed from log-likelihood to a log of the ratio 
of association scores as show in equation 4
Where 
A( senseA,~o=n , collocation,) 
log A( other_senses~o=~ , collocation,) (4) 
A(  ollo ation,) = prob(   n  lcoUo ation,) 
prob( sense) 
(5) 
This helped overcome the bias of conditional 
probabilities towards the most frequent sense. Re- 
call is 71% and precision is 72% when using the log- 
likelihood to order the decision list with a stopping 
condition that the tagged portion exceeds 95% of the 
target data. The ratio of association scores compen- 
sates for the relative frequencies of the senses and 
on stopping the recall is 76% and precision is 78% 
Unfortunately evaluation on the target word 
"plant" was rather optimistic when contrasted with 
an evMuation on randomly selected targets involving 
finer word sense distinctions. In a experiment 390 
mid-frequency nouns were trained and the algorithm 
used to disambiguate he same nouns appearing in 
the SemCor files of the Brown corpus. This pro- 
duced only 29% for both recall and precision which 
was only just better than chance. An important 
source of error seems to have been the poor quality 
of the automatically derived seeds. 
On account of the training time that would be 
required Yarowsky's unsupervised algorithm was 
abandoned for the purpose of tagging the argument 
heads. The Wilks and Stevenson style strategy was 
chosen instead because it requires torage of one pa- 
rameter only and is exceptionally easy to apply. A 
major disadvantage for this approach is that lower 
rank senses do not feature in the data at all. It is 
hoped that this will not matter where we are col- 
lecting information from many heads in a particu- 
lar slot because any mistagging will be outweighed 
by correct aggings overall. However this approach 
would be unhelpful where we want to distinguish 
behaviour for different word senses. A potential use 
of Yarowky's algorithm might be verb sense distinc- 
tion. The experiments outlined in the next section 
have been conducted using verb form rather than 
sense. If verbs sense distinction were to be per- 
formed it would be important o obtain the pref- 
erences for the different senses and would not be 
appropriate to lump the preferences together under 
the predominant sense. It is hoped that with some 
55 
alteration to the automatic seed derivation and al- 
lowance for a coarser grained distinction this would 
be viable. 
a threshold of 0.1 was adhered to as this not only 
avoided noise but also reduced the search space. 
3.2 Acqu is i t ion  of  Select ional  Prefer-  
ences 
Representation a d acquisition of selectional pref- 
erences is based on Li and Abe's concept of an 
ATCM. The details of how such a model is acquired 
from corpus data using WordNet and the MDL prin- 
ciple is detailed in the papers (Li & Abe, 1995; Abe 
& Li, 1996). 
The WordNet hypernym noun hierarchy is used 
here as it is available and ready made. Using a re- 
source produced by humans has its drawbacks, par- 
ticularly that the classification is not tailored to the 
task and data at hand and is prone to the inconsis- 
tencies and errors that beset any man-made l xical 
resource. Still the alternative of using an automati- 
cally clustered hierarchy has other disadvantages, a 
particular problem being that techniques so far de- 
veloped often give rise to semantically incongruous 
classes (Pereira, Tishby, & Lee, 1993). 
Calculation of the class frequencies i key to the 
process of acquisition of selectional preferences. Li
and Abe estimate class frequencies by dividing the 
frequencies of nouns occurring in the set of syn- 
onyms of a class between all the classes in which 
they appear. Class frequencies are then inherited 
up the hierarchy. In order to keep to their definition 
of a "tree cut" all nouns in the hierarchy need to 
be positioned at leaves. WordNet does not adhere 
to this stipulation and so they prune the hierarchy 
at classes where a noun featured in the set of syn- 
onyms has occurred in the data. This strategy was 
abandoned in the work described here because some 
words in the data belonged at root classes. For ex- 
ample in the direct object of "build" one instance 
of the word "entity" occurred which appears at one 
of the roots in WordNet. If the tree were pruned 
at the "ENTITY" class there would be no possibil- 
ity for the preference of "build" to distinguish be- 
tween the subclasses "LIFE FORM" and "PHYSI- 
CAL OBJECT". 
As an alternative strategy in this work, new leaf 
classes were created for every internal class in the 
WordNet hierarchy so that terminals only occurred 
at leaves but the detail of WordNet was left intact. 
Li and Abe's strategy of pruning at classes less than 
3.2.1 Experiments 3 and 4 
The input data was produced by the system de- 
scribed in (Briscoe ~ Carroll, 1997) and comprised 
2 million words of parsed text with argument heads 
and subcategorisation frames identified. Only argu- 
ment heads consisting of common ouns, days of the 
week and months and personal pronouns with the 
exception of "it" were used. The personal pronouns 
were all tagged with the "SOMEONE" class which 
is unambiguous in WordNet. Selectional preferences 
were acquired for a handful of verbs using either 
subject or object position. In experiment 3 class 
frequencies were calculated in much the same way 
as in Li and Abe's original experiments, dividing fre- 
quencies for each noun between the set of classes in 
which they featured as synonyms. In experiment 4 
the nouns in the target slots were disambiguated us- 
ing the approach outlined in experiment 1. Where 
frequency data was not available for the target word 
the word was simply treated as ambiguous and class 
frequencies were calculated as in experiment 3.
Since ATCMs have only been obtained for the 
subject and object slot and for 10 target verbs no 
formal evaluation has been performed as yet. In- 
stead the ATCMs were examined and some observa- 
tions are given below along with diagrams howing 
some of the models obtained. For clarity only some 
of the nodes have been shown and classes are la- 
belled with some of the synonyms belonging to that 
class in WordNet. 
In order to obtain the ATCMs "tree cut models" 
(TCMs) for the target slot, irrespective of verb are 
obtained. A TCM is similar to an ATCM except 
that the scores associated with each class on the cut 
are probabilities and should sum to 1. The TCMs 
obtained for a given slot with and without WSD 
were similar. 
In contrast ATCMs are produced with a small 
data set specific to the target verb. The verbs in 
our target set having between 32 ('clean') and 2176 
('make') instances. Because of this the noise from 
erroneous enses is not as easily filtered and WSD 
does seem to make a difference although this de- 
pends on the verb and the degree of polysemy of 
the most common arguments. 
"Eat" is a verb which selects trongly for its ob- 
56 
i . . . .  "l , ~ Shaded boxes 
. . . . . . .  for new leaf created I ent i ty  1 
for internal node 
ATCM no WED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  " -"  - 2:" '/ 
ATCM with WSIT . . . . . . . .  i , '" ", 
Figure 1: ATCM for 'eat' Object slot 
. . . . . . . . . . .  ATCM without WaD 
. . . . .  1...8 . . . . . .  _ . . . . . . .  ATCM with WaD 
<~. . . .~  ~xmple  nouns undw lhe node In the cut 
~,,.~t, .? link'* |cen~u hoAme " '~:~ '~ ' /  ' flgh: 
. . . . .  " -  - - -  . . , .h ,  
A* 
Figure 2: ATCM for 'establish' Object slot 
ject slot. The ATCMs with and without WSD are 
pictured in figure I. The ATCMs are similar but 
WSD gives slightly stronger scores to the appropri- 
ate nodes. Additionally the NATURAL OBJECT 
class changes from a slight preference in the ATCM 
without WSD to a score below 1 (indicating no ev- 
idence for a preference) with WSD. WSD appears 
to slightly improve the preferences acquired but the 
difference is small. The reasons are that there is a 
predominant sense of "eat" which selects strongly 
for its direct object and many of the heads in the 
data were monosemous (e.g. food, sandwich and 
pretzel). 
In contrast "establish" only has 79 instances and 
without any WSD the ATCM consists of the root 
node with a score of 1.8. This shows that without 
WSD the variety of erroneous enses causes gross 
over-generalisation when compared to the cut with 
WSD as pictured in figure 2. There are cases where 
the WSD is faulty and many heads are not covered 
by the criteria outlined in experiment 1. The head 
"right" for example contributes to a higher associa- 
tion score at the LOCATION node though its cor- 
rect sense really falls under the ABSTRACTION 
node. However even with these inadequacies the 
cut with WSD appears to provide a reasonable set 
of preferences a opposed to the cut at the root node 
which is uninformative. 
There was no distinction of verb senses for the 
preferences acquired and the data and ATCM for 
"serve" highlights this. "Serve" has a number of 
senses including the sense of "meet the needs of" 
or "set food on the table" or "undergo a due pe- 
riod'. The heads in direct object position could on 
the whole be identified as belonging to one or other 
of these senses. The ATCM with WSD is illustrated 
in figure 3 The GROUP, RELATION and MENTAL 
OBJECT nodes relate to the first sense, the SUB- 
57 
STANCE to the second and the third sense to the 
STATE and RELATION nodes. The ATCM with- 
out WSD was again an uninformative cut at the 
root. Ideally preferences should be acquired respec- 
tive to verb sense otherwise the preferences for the 
different predicates will be confused. 
Although formal evaluation has as yet to be per- 
formed the models examined so far with the crude 
WSD seem to improve on those without. This is 
especially so in cases of sparse data. 
Some errors were due to the parser. For example 
time adverbials uch as "the night before" were 
mistaken as direct objects when the parser failed to 
identify the passive as in :- 
"... presented a lamb, killed the night before". 
Errors also arose because collocations such as 
"post office" were not recognised~as such. Despite 
these errors the advantages Of using automatic 
parsing are significant in terms of the quantity of 
data thereby made available and portability to new 
domains. 
3.3 Word Sense  D isambiguat ion  us ing 
Se lec t ion  P re ferences  
The tree cuts obtained in experiments 3 and 4 have 
been used for WSD in a bootstrapping approach 
where heads, disambiguated by selectional prefer- 
ences, are then used as input data to the preference 
acquisition system. WSD using the ATCMs sim- 
ply selects all senses for a noun that fall under the 
node in the cut with the highest association score 
with senses for this word. For example the sense 
of "chicken" under VICTUALS would be preferred 
over the senses under LIFE FORM when occurring 
as the direct object of "eat". The granularity of the 
WSD depends on how specific the cut is. The ap- 
proach has not been evaluated formally although we 
have plans to so with SemCor. A small evaluation 
has been performed comparing the manually tagged 
direct objects of "eat" with those selected using the 
cuts from experiment 3. The coarse tagging is con- 
sidered correct when the identified senses contain 
the manually selected one. This provides a recall of 
62% and precision of 93% which can be compared 
to a baseline precision of 55% which is calculated as 
in equation 6
Number.-Sensesu Under_Cut ~neHeads Number_Sensesn 
Total.Heads_Covered (6) 
Naturally this approach will work better for verbs 
which select more strongly for their arguments. 
Further experiments have been conducted which 
feed the disambiguated heads back into the selec- 
tional preference acquisition system. 
3.3.1 Exper iments 5 and 6 
In experiment 5 cuts obtained in experiment 3,with- 
out any initial WSD, are used to disambiguate he 
heads before these are then fed back in. In contrast 
experiment 6 uses the cuts obtained with Wilks and 
Stevenson style WSD from experiment 4 to disam- 
biguate the heads. In both cases the cuts are only 
used to dis ambiguate the heads appearing with the 
target verb and the full data sample required for the 
prior distribution TCM is left as in experiments 3 
and 4. 
Where the verb selects trongly for its arguments, 
for example "eat", the cuts obtained in experiments 
5 and 6 were similar to those achieved with initial 
Wilks and Stevenson WSD, for example both have 
the effect of taking the class NATURAL OBJECT 
below 1 (i.e. removing the weak indication of a pref- 
erence). 
In contrast where the quantity of data is sparse 
and the verb selects less strongly the cut obtained 
from fully ambiguous data (experiment 5) is unhelp- 
ful for WSD. However if the Wilks and Stevenson 
style disambiguation is performed on the initial data 
the cuts in experiment 6 show great improvement on 
those from experiment 4. For example the ATCM in 
experiment 6 for "establish" showed no preferences 
for the LOCATION and POSSESSION nodes where 
preferences in experiment 4 had arisen because of er- 
roneous word senses. 
4 Conclusions 
From inspection of the ATCMs obtained so far it 
appears that even crude WSD does help the selec- 
tional preference acquisition especially in cases of 
sparse data, however this still needs formal evalua- 
tion to verify whether the difference is significant. 
WSD is particularly useful when the quantity of 
data is small as is the case when collecting data for a 
58 
. . . . . . . . . . .  ATCM without WSD 
1.9 . . . . . . . .  ATCM with WSD 
<ROOT> * Example nouns under the node In the nut 
f ~ 0 b ~ l  J ~ ~ubstan?e J ~,;:;'rf;;le~t 
A b 4 
bls?uet memory 
skate purpose 
Figure 3: ATCM for 'serve' Object slot 
specific predicate. WSD selecting the most frequent 
sense regardless of context certainly seems to help 
overall despite mistakes. The preferences are im- 
proved still further if art iterative approach is taken 
and the preferences produced with initial WSD are 
used to disambiguate he heads which cart then be 
fed back into the preference acquisition system. This 
has the effect of removing preferences caused by er- 
roneous enses. 
So far experiments u ing Yarowsky's unsupervised 
algorithm take too long for training each word to 
produce semantic tagging of sufficient quantity of 
text for preference acquisition but may be useful 
for disambiguation f target verbs, particularly with 
adaptations to aLlow a coarser grarmlarity than the 
exact WordNet sense. 
5 Future 
The importance of word sense disambiguation on 
the input data needs to be subjected to formal eval- 
uation. 
Undoubtedly different underlying semantic roles 
will occur in a specified argument slot and this will 
confuse the issue. It would be interesting to exam- 
ine the preferences acquired where the data used is 
specific to the subca.tegorisation frame as well as to 
the argument slot. Naturally this cart only be done 
if we have sufficient data to start with. 
Where there is insufficient data for a target verb 
it may be worth merging the data for similar verbs. 
The WordNet verb hierarchies might provide a use- 
ful classification for this purpose. 
Although WordNet is used here, the classification 
could easily be changed. It would be interesting to 
compare results from a re-implementation using an 
alternative hierarchy more in tune with the corpus 
data. The hierarchy could be produced by humans 
or automatically. 
The encoding of the model and data for the MDL 
principle needs attention as this will affect the level 
of generalisation. As yet the description length has 
assumed a tree rather than a DAG and it is apparent 
that cuts at nodes with shared daughters will be 
penalised in the current scheme. 
Reference 
Abe, N., & Li, H. (1996). Learning word association 
norms using tree cut pair models.. Unpublished. cmp- 
1g/9605029. 
Beckwith, It., Felbaum, C., Gross, D., & Miller, G. A. (1991). 
WordNet: A \]exical database organised on psycholin- 
guistic principles. In Zernik, U. (Ed.), Lexical Acqmss- 
twn: Exploltmg On-Line Resources to Bmld a Lexwon, 
pp. 211-232. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates., Hillsdale 
NJ. 
Briscoe, T., & Caxroll, J. (1997). Automatic extraction of sub- 
categorization from corpora.. In Fifth Apphed Natural 
Language Processing Con\]erence. 
Li, H., & Abe, N. (1995). Generalizing case frames using a 
thesaurus and the MDL principle. In Proceedings of 
Recent Advances m Natural Language Processing, pp. 
239-248. 
Miller, George, A., Leacock, C., Tengi, It., & Bunker, R. T. 
(1993). A semantic oncordance.. In Proceedings of 
the ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology., 
pp. 303-308. Morgan Kaufman. 
Pereira, F., Tishby, N., & Lee, L. (1993). Distributional clus- 
tering of English words. In Praceedmgs of the 31st 
59 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguists., pp. 183-190. 
Resnik, P. (1993a). Selection and Information: A Glass-Based 
Approach to Lezical Relationships. Ph.D. thesis, Uni- 
versity of Pennsylvania. 
Resnik, P. (1993b). Semantic lasses and syntactic ambigu- 
ity. In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human 
Language Technology., pp. 278-283. Morgan Kanfman. 
Rib,s, F. (1994). Learning more appropriate selectional re- 
strictions. Tech. rep. 41, ACQUILEX-II. 
Ribas, F. (1995). On learning more appropriate selectional 
restrictions.. In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association \]or Com- 
putational Linguistics., pp. 112-118. 
Wilks, Y., & Stevenson, M. (1996). The grammar of sense -
is word-sense tagging much more than part-of-speech 
tagging?, cmp-lg/9607028. 
Yarowsky~ D. (1995). Unsupervised word sense disambigua- 
tion rivaling supervised methods.. In Proceedings of 
the 83rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguists., pp. 189-196. 
Zernik, U. (1991). Introduction.. In Zernik, U. (Ed.), Lexical 
Acquisition : Ezploiting On.Line Resources to Build 
a Lezicon., pp. 1-26. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates., 
Hillsdale NJ. 
60 
