l 
l 
I 
II 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
l 
Proper  Name Class i f icat ion in an In format ion  Ext ract ion  Toolset 
Peter Wallis, Edmund Yuen, and Greg Chase 
Information Technology Division, DSTO, Box 1500 Salisbury, Sth Aust. 5108 
{Peter.Wallis,Edmund.Yuen,Greg.Chase}@dsto.defence.gov.au 
Abstract 
Applied discourse analysis is a hot topic in In- 
formation Retrieval (IR) and the related field 
of Information Extraction (IE). Although in- 
teresting observations about discourse can be 
made "by hand," applications require large 
quantities of data about language - -  data 
which is rather uninteresting. This paper in- 
vestigates u ing statistical analysis over a body 
of text to suggest new rules for recognizing 
named entities. 
1 Introduction 
Understanding human languages on any sort of 
scale is a knowledge intensive task. This paper de- 
scribes a corpus based approach to gathering lan- 
guage data in the shallow parts of the NLP pond. 
Information retrieval is a popular application for re- 
searchers interested in applied NLP, but the problem 
of improving retrieval effectiveness appears to be in- 
tractable (Smeaton, 1992; Wallis, 1995). One helpful 
technique is tagging the proper names in text. Tag- 
ging and classifying (e.g. Is "Washington" a place 
or a person?) the named entities and co-references 
to them (she, he, the company) in text is also a pri- 
mary concern in systems for information extraction 
(DARPA, 1995). 
Information extraction (IE) is a well defined task; 
the aim being to extract data from free text, and 
put it in a more structured format. The IE task is 
not only well defined, it has application and is hence 
often seen as a prime example of language ngineer- 
ing, where the aim is to explicitly solve a problem 
rather than to understand the nature of language. 
IE systems have typically only been successful in 
narrow domains with significant effort required to 
move and existing information extraction system to 
a new problem domain. One approach is to use tools 
in a development environment that assists the lan- 
guage engineer to create a new information extrac- 
tion system from pre-exisiting components. 
The DSTO Fact Ext rac tor  Workbench pro- 
vides the tools to create re-usable text skimming 
components, called fact extractors, that perform IE 
on a (very) limited domain. These components can 
be used directly to find things like dates and the 
names of companies including co-references, or they 
can be assembled to create larger fact extractors that 
skim text for more abstract entities uch as company 
mergers. 
The workbench provides different views of the do- 
main text to assist in the development process. As 
an example, the language ngineer might be inter- 
ested in seeing how the word "bought" is used in 
the domain o.f interest. A "grep"-like tool allows 
him or her to view all and only those sentences con- 
taining "bought". Naturally more complex patterns 
are possible incorporating previously developed fact 
extractors in the pattern. 
This paper discusses an extension to the corpus 
viewing tool set that assists the language ngineer 
to find words, called selector terms, that may aid in 
the classification of proper nouns and determination 
of possible co-references for those nouns. First, we 
describe the domain in which we are applying our 
fact extractors. Next, we introduce our method of 
measuring the suitability of words as selector terms. 
Lastly we discuss how this data is collected and pre- 
sented in the fact extractor workbench. 
2 Problem Domain 
The Named Entity Test is one component of 
the message understanding conference (MUC 5- 
7 (DARPA, 1995)) evaluations. The goal of the NE 
test is to add SGML tags to the evaluation texts 
that mark up all the proper names. The body of 
text used in these trials is a selection of articles 
from the Wall Street Journal. McDonald (McDon- 
ald, 1996) characterizes the problem as having three 
sub-components: 
Wallis, Yuen and Chase 161 Proper Name Classification 
Peter Wallis, Edmund Yuen and Greg Chase (1998) Proper Name Classification in an Information Extraction Toolset. In 
D.M.W. Powers (ed.) NeMLaP3/CoNLL98: New Methods in Language Processing and Computational Natural Language 
Learning, ACL, pp 161-162. 
? delimit he sequence of words that make up the 
name, i.e. identify its boundaries; 
? classify the resulting constituent based on the 
kind of individual it names (e.g. Person, Orga- 
nization, Location); and 
? record the name and the individual it denotes 
in the discourse model 
The emphasis in this paper is on a method for 
classifying the name using external evidence. 
2.1 Classif icat ion 
During this process, internal  evidence (McDon- 
ald, 1996) may be gleaned as to the type of the 
named entity. Titles such as Mr, Ms, Dr, Sir, and Jr 
provide evidence of the named entity being a person. 
The presence of Ltd. or G.m.b.H. signify a company. 
Externa l  evidence (McDonald, 1996) about a 
named entity's type can also be used. If it is unclear 
whether a name refers to a person or a company, it 
can help to look at the verb it participates in, or 
at any modifiers it may have. People do things like 
"head" organizations, "speak" and "walk". Com- 
panies "merge" and "take measures". People have 
employment roles, gender, and age; companies have 
locations and managing directors. Ideally a sys- 
tem would have rules that say if a subject-of-a- 
verb( < NE >, (head, say, explain ...) ) then 
the named entity is of type person. Similarly a 
function modified-by( < NE >, (chairman, head, 
< number > years old, ...) ) could be used in a 
rule to determine if the < NE > is a person. Writ- 
ing such rules require a list of terms which are good 
selector  te rms for the entity of interest. The pro- 
posal is to add a tool to the fact extractor work- 
bench that helps the language ngineer find good 
selector terms using probabilistic measures. 
3 Finding Class Selectors 
To measure how good a selector term is for an ex- 
isting fact extractor, we need to compare the proba- 
blity that the word is present in a sentence and the 
probability that the word is in a sentence given that 
a "fact" is in that sentence. 
w = word 
S = sentence 
Sf = sentence with fact f 
Prob(w in S \[ f in S) = 
number of S I with w 
number of S f 
(1) 
number of S with w 
Prob(w in S) = number of S (2) 
If w and f are independent then 1 will approx- 
imate 2 however if they are dependent 1 will be 
different from 2. 
A measure of w's selective power can be calculated 
as a ratio. 
Sell(w ) ~ Prob(w in S t f in S) 
Prob( w in S) (3) 
An Sel of close to 1 indicates little correlation be- 
tween the term, w, and the fact, \]. An Sel sig- 
nificantly greater than 1 indicates a high degree of 
correlation between w and f and hence w is a good 
selector term. Interestingly, a Sel of significantly less 
than 1 (close to zero) indicates that the presence of 
w is a good indication of f being absent. 
4 Incorporating Selective Power 
A tool has been incorporated into the Fact Extractor 
Workbench that allows the user to run one or more 
fact extractors over the text corpus and produce and 
ordered set of candidate selector terms. This list of 
selector terms can then be considered for inclusion 
into a more refined fact extractor. 
For example, by measuring the selective power of 
corpus words for the "City" fact extractor pattern, 
we can find which words are used in the context of 
Washington, the city and which are used in the con- 
text of Washington, the person. By ranking corpus 
words based on selective power, we single out can- 
didates as good selector terms to refine the "City" 
fact extractor. 
References 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA). Proceedings Sixth Message Un- 
derstanding Conference (MUC-6), November 
1995. 
David D. McDonald. Internal and external evi- 
dence in the identification and semantic atego- 
rization of proper names. In Branirn~ir Bogu- 
raev and James Pustejovsky, editors, Corpus Pro- 
cessing for Lexical Acquisition, pages 21-39. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1996. A Bradford Book. 
Alan F. Smeaton. Progress in the application of 
natural language processing to information re- 
trieval tasks. The Computer Journal, 35(3):268- 
278, 1992. 
Peter Wallis. Semantic Signatures for Information 
Retrieval. PhD thesis, Faculty of Applied Science, 
R.M.I.T., 1995. 
Wallis, Yuen and Chase 162 Proper Name Classification 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
Ii 
II 
II 
II 
II 
