II 
I! 
II 
II 
II 
Towards  Language Acqu is i t ion  by an At tent ion-Shar ing  Robot  
Hideki Kozima Akira Ito 
Communications Research Laboratory 
588-2, Iwaoka-cho, Iwaoka, Nishi-ku, 
Kobe 651-2401, Japan 
{xkozima, ai}@crl, go.  jp  
Abstract 
This paper describes our preliminary research 
on "attention-sharing" in infants' language ac- 
quisition. Attention-sharing is the activity of 
paying one's attention to someone lse's atten- 
tional target. This enables one to observe oth- 
ers' sensory-input (what they are perceiving 
from the target) and motor-output (what they 
are doing in response to the target). Being 
inspired by lack of attention-sharing i  autis- 
tic children, we assumed that observation of 
others' behavior by attention-sharing plays an 
indispensable role in symbol acquisition. As 
a test-bed for attention-sharing, we are de- 
veloping a robot that can follow people's at- 
tentional targets by means of monitoring their 
gaze-direction. 
1 Introduction 
Machine acquisition of natural anguage is one of the 
most challenging targets of cognitive science. As a 
basis for language acquisition, we deal with acqui- 
sition of a symbol system, which articulates things 
and events in the world into categories and gives 
phonological labels to the categories. The relation- 
ships between the categories and labels are arbitrary 
conventions shared by people, so that infants have 
to learn them through interaction with people. 
This paper describes the role of "attention-shar- 
ing" (Baron-Cohen, 1995), especially that based on 
gaze, in infants' symbol acquisition. Figure 1 il- 
lustrates how attention-sharing is achieved: self (S) 
captures gaze-direction ofan agent (A), then the self 
searches in the direction and identifies the target 
(T). Shared attention spotlights things and events 
being mentioned and makes the communication co- 
herent about the same target. 
2 Attention-Sharing and 
Symbol Acquisition 
Observation of others' verbal behavior provides in- 
fants with learning data for symbol acquisition. Let 
us consider that an agent, looking at a cat, says 
"cat", as illustrated in Figure 2. In order to mimic 
this verbal behavior, the self has to observe the 
(1) capture gaze 
Figure 1. 
(2) identify the target 
Attention-sharing based on gaze. 
0 = "cat" 
o'1/z' ? 
Figure 2. Observing other's verbal behavior. 
I '  O' I '  O' 
F igure 3. Introducing mediators between I/O. 
agent's ensory-input I (stimulus from the cat) and 
motor-output O (verbal response) and to make the 
association between them. 
Attention-sharing enables us to observe someone 
else's input and output, as also shown in Figure 2. 
Attention-sharing guarantees that I '  (the self's in- 
put) resembles I, since both are paying attention to 
the same target. At the gaze-capturing stage (Fig- 
ure 1, left), the self can observe the agent's output 
O and map it onto the self's motor image Oq (We 
assume an innate mapping mechanism like imitation 
of facial gestures by neonates.) 
Although thus observed relationships between in- 
put space and output space may vary in many ways 
(size, color, tone, volume, etc.), one can construct 
an efficient mediator between these spaces. As illus- 
trated in Figure 3, the complex relationships (left) 
Kozima and 1to 245 Language Acquisition by an Attention-Sharing Robot 
Hideki Kozima and Akira Ito (1998) Towards Language Acquisition by an Attentlon-Sharing Robot. In D.M.W. Powers (ed.) 
NeMLaP3/CoNLL 98: New Methods in Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning, ACL, pp 245-246. 
F igure  4. The attention-sharing robot. 
can be decomposed into several (almost separated) 
components by introducing a hidden mediator space 
M (right), on which "symbols" can emerge. 
3 Imp l i ca t ions  o f  Aut i sm 
Attention-sharing is commonly seen in infants at the 
pre-verbal stage. Its development starts before 6 
months old, and is completed at around 18 months 
old (Butterworth, 1991). Also in some non-human 
primates how attention-sharing (Itakura, 1996). 
Most of infants and children with autism do not 
show attention-sharing; being instructed by an ex- 
perimenter, however, they can do it (Baron-Cohen, 
1995). This means they axe unaware that one's gaze- 
direction implies his or her attentional target. 
Being unaware of others' attention, children with 
autism show typical disorders in verbal and non- 
verbal communication (Frith, 1989). Most of chil- 
dren with autism can not acquire language or use 
language properly. This is because (1) they failed 
in observing verbal (and also pragmatic) behavior 
of others, and (2) they failed in observing positive/ 
negative feedback for elaborating their hypothetic 
language models. 
4 The  At tent ion -Shar ing  Robot  
We are developing a robot, Infanoid, as a test-bed 
for our model of attention-sharing. The robot is in- 
tended to create shared attention with humans in 
terms of monitoring their gaze-direction. 
The robot has a head, as shown in Figure 4, 
with four CCD cameras (left/right x zoom/wide) 
and servo motors to drive the "eyes" at the speed 
of human saccade. The images taken by the cam- 
eras are sent to a workstation for gaze-monitoring. 
The gaze-monitoring process consists of the fol- 
lowing tasks, as also shown in Figure 5: (1) detect a 
face in a scene, (2) saccade to the face and switch to 
the zoom cameras, (3) detect eyes and determine the 
gaze-direction i terms of the position of the pupils, 
and (4) search for an object in the direction. If some- 
thing relevant is found, the robot identifies it as the 
target. 
We have developed a prototype of the robot and 
the real-time face/eye detectors. W'e are now work- 
(1) detect a face 
(3) capture gaze 
Figure 5. 
(2) saccade and zoom 
N 
(4) identify the target 
Gaze-monitoring process 
ing on gaze capturing and target selection. Our pre- 
liminary study found that these tasks require some 
top-down information like the object's "relevance" 
(Sperber and Wilson, 1986) to the current context. 
5 Conc lus ion  and  Future  Research  
We described our preliminary model of attention- 
sharing as a device for observing learning data (oth- 
ers' verbal behavior) for symbol acquisition. 
The model will work in the bootstrapping stage of 
infants' symbol acquisition; it only deals with refer- 
ring to physical objects. Infants at this stage tend 
to take an unknown label as a category name of a 
physical object, and then apply the label to other 
objects with similar shape (Imai, 1997). 
In future research, we have to fully implement 
the gaze-monitoring process and to evaluate it in 
human-robot interaction. Also we are planning 
an experiment on evaluating the accuracy of hu- 
man gaze-monitoring; this will reveal how humans 
rely on top-down semantic/pragmatic information in 
attention-sharing. 
Re ferences  
Simon Baron-Cohen. 1995. Mindblindness: An Es- 
say on Autism and Theory of Mind, MIT Press. 
George Butterworth and Nicholas Jarrett. 1991. 
What minds have in common is space. British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9:55-72. 
Uta Frith. 1989. Autism: Explaining the Enigma, 
Blackwell. 
Mutsumi Imai. 1997. Origins of word-learning prin- 
ciples. Cognitive Studies, 4:75-98. (in Japanese) 
Shoji Itakura. 1996. An exploratory study of gaze- 
monitoring in nonhuman primates. Japanese Psy- 
chological Research, 38:174-180. 
Dan Sperber and Deirdre Wilson. 1986. Relevance: 
Communication and Cognition, Blackwell. 
Kozima and It(> 246 Language Acquisition by an Attention-Sharing Robot 
II 
!1 
II 
II 
II 
II 
