Integrated generation of graphics and text: a corpus study 
Marc  Cor lo  and Guy  Lapa lme 
<cor io@IRO.UMontreal .CA> 
<lapa lme@IRO.UMontrea l .CA> 
D6partement d' informatique et de recherche op@rationnelle 
Universit@ de Montr6al, CP  6128, Succ Centre-Vil le 
Montr6al Qu6bec Canada, H3C 3J7 
Abst rac t  
We describe the results of a corpus study of 
more than 400 text excerpts that accompany 
graphics. We show that text and graphics play 
complementary oles in transmitting informa- 
tion from the writer to the reader and derive 
some observations for the automatic generation 
of texts associated with graphics. 
For the past few years, we have studied the 
automatic generation of graphics from statisti- 
cal data in the context of the PostGraphe sys- 
tem (Fasciano, 1996; Fasciano and Lapalme, 
1998) based on the study of graphic princi- 
ples from such diverse sources as Bertin (1983), 
Cleveland (1980) and Zelazny (1989). Post- 
firaphe is given the data in tabular form as 
might be found in a spreadsheet; also input is a 
declaration of the types of values in the columns 
of the table. The user then indicates the inten- 
tions to be conveyed in the graphics (e.g. com- 
pare two variables or show the evolution of a 
set of variables) and the system generates a re- 
port in lATEX with the appropriate PostScript 
graphic files. PostGraphe also generates an ac- 
companying text following a few simple text 
schemas. But before adding new schemas, we 
have decided to make a corpus study of texts as- 
sociated with graphics and this paper presents 
the results of this study. We studied more than 
400 texts and we will show that the saying "a 
picture is worth a thousand words" needs to be 
modulated because graphics and text are far 
from being interchangeable and that their in- 
teractions are quite subtle. With hindsight, this 
may seem obvious but, without a corpus study, 
we could not have documented this result. Al- 
though multimedia systems have been studied 
for many years, we are not aware of any previ- 
ous corpus study of the same scale. 
63 
1 Overv iew o f  PostGraphe 
Many sophisticated tools can be used to build a 
presentation using statistical graphs. However, 
most of them focus on producing professional- 
looking graphics without rying to help the user 
to organize the presentation. To help in this as- 
pect, we have built PostGraphe which generates 
a report integrating raphics and text from a 
set of writer's intentions. 
The writer's intentions can be classified ac- 
cording to two basic criteria: structural differ- 
ences and contents differences. We refer to in- 
tentions derived from structural differences as 
object ive in tent ions  and intentions derived 
from contents differences as sub ject ive  inten-  
t ions. This definition stems from the fact that 
when differences between two intentions are 
more content han structure related, the writer 
is choosing what to say and not how to say it. 
The writer is thus making a subjective choice as 
to what is more important. 
In our research, we have built a classifica- 
tion of messages, given in figure 1, based on 
Zelazny's (1989) work. At the first level, our 
classification contains 5 categories two of which 
have sub-categories obtained by using a frac- 
tional modifier. 
For comparison, the fractional modifier indi- 
cates that the comparison should be done on 
fractions of the whole instead of the actual val- 
ues. For distribution, we obtain a specialized 
intention where the classes are presented ac- 
cording to their fraction of the total. At the 
second level, the intentions become specialized 
according to subjective criteria. 
These simple intentions can then combined 
either by composition or superposition. In com- 
position, the order of the variables is important 
and there is a dominant intention; for example, 
the comparison of evolutions is quite different 
Objective Structure i Subjective Content 
How to say ? What to say ? 
Reading(V) 
Comparison(S1,S2) 
Comparison 
Fractional(V,S) 
Evolution(V1,V2) 
Correlation '<V1,V2) 
Distribution(V,S) 
Distribution 
Fractional(S) 
Increase 
Decrease 
Stability 
Recapitulative 
Figure 1: Two level decomposition f simple in- 
tentions: V is a variable and S is a set of vari- 
ables 
from the evolution of a comparison. For exam- 
ple, Sales figures of Xyz increased less quickly 
than the ones of Pqr between 1992 and 1994 
compares evolutions while Pqr always tayed at 
the top except between 1992 and 1994 shows the 
evolution of the comparison. In superposition, 
the intentions are merely expressed using the 
same graphic but the intentions do not inter- 
fere. 
Figure 2 shows the the part of the Prolog in- 
put specifying the intentions and the output 
from PostGraphe. The intentions are divided 
in 2 sections: the first presents the 3 vari- 
ables (year, company and profits). The second 
presents the comparison of the profits between 
companies and the evolution of the profits along 
the years. 
We have also "ported" this idea of taking ac- 
count of the writer's intentions into the spread- 
sheet world by creating an alternative Chart 
Wizard for Microsoft Excel which asks for the 
intentions of the user (comparison, evolution, 
distribution ... ) instead of prompting for the 
sort of graphic (bar chart, pie chart ... ); see 
(Fasciano and Lapalme, 1998) for more infor- 
mation. 
2 Text  and  graph ics  in tegrat ion  
Graphics and text are very different media. For- 
tunately, when their integration is successful, 
they complement each other very well: a picture 
shows whereas a text describes. To create an 
data(... 
7. the intentions 
\[ \[lecture (~nn4e), lecture (compagnie), 
lecture (profits) \], 
\[comparaison( \[profits\], \[compagnie\] ), 
evolution (profits, ~nn~e) \]\] , 
7, the raw data 
\[\[1987,'A' ,30\] , . . . \ ] ) .  
Nouvel le section (3 intent ions h t ra i ter) .  
annde 
compagnie 
A 
B 
C 
1987 1988 1989 1990 
profits profits profits profits 
30 35 40 35 
160 165 140 155 
50 55 60 95 
Nouvel le section (2 intent ions h t ra i ter) .  
180 
150 
120 
90 
60 
30 
profits B 
profi~ C / 
profits A 
1987 1988 9 1990 
ann6e 
De 1987 ~ 1989 les profits de la compagnie A 
ont augment6 de 30 $ ~ 40 $. Jusqu'en 1990 ils 
ont diminu6 de 40 $ ~ 35 $. 
De 1987 h 1988 les profits de B ont augment6 
de 160 $ h 165 $. Pendant 1 annfie ils ont 
diminu6 de 25 $. Jusqu'en 1990 ils ont 
augments de 140 $ h 155 $. 
De 1987 h 1990 les profits de C ont augment6 
de 50 $ h 95 $. 
Figure 2: Input specifying the intentions and 
the French Report generated by PostGraphe 
64 
efficient report from tabular data, choices must 
be made between modes of expression (text vs 
graphics) by taking into account their strong 
points but also their effect on the reader. 
Graphics are usually floating elements that do 
not appear just beside the accompanying text, 
they are often moved to satisfy other graphical 
constraints such as avoiding blank space at the 
end of a page. Graphics make important ele- 
ments of the data standout and catch the eye 
of the reader. The text of the report does not 
only describe or analyse data but it also links 
with the graphics by means of references to re- 
inforce the intentions of the writer. Text and 
graphic coordination pose important problems 
identified in (Roth et al, 1991) as 
s t ruc tura l  incompat ib i l i ty :  text and graph- 
ics do not compose in the same way: for ex- 
ample, in a graphic representation f a tree, 
dependents are near the root but in a pre- 
order textual description, the links might 
be harder to make; 
lack of  cohesion: for a text to make an ex- 
plicit link with the graphical elements of an 
illustration, the text generator must have 
access to the structural elements of the 
graphics; 
redundancy :  the text should not repeat infor- 
mation that is better given by the graphics, 
although in a few cases it is a good idea to 
re-emphasize important information in the 
text. 
3 Corpus  s tudy  
As we want to generate not only well formed 
text but appropriate ones that complement the 
information available from the graphics, we 
have built a corpus of 411 French texts asso- 
ciated with graphics from such diverse sources 
as "Tendances ociales" published every three 
months by Statistics Canada, books on statis- 
tics, investment funds reports, governmental re- 
ports, etc.; see (Corio, 1998) for details. Like 
with most corpus studies, it is very hard to af- 
firm that this study is representative but we 
have tried not to bias the kind of texts in any 
way except for cases when we detected that ei- 
ther the text or the graphics were not appropri- 
ate given the principles alluded to in section 2. 
The analysis of our corpus revealed 7 main 
themes for texts combined with graphics. Ta- 
ble 1 gives the frequencies of each theme for the 
intentions described in figure 2. We now briefly 
describe ach theme with a few examples. Fi- 
nally, we will raise some automatic text gener- 
ation issues that were the main motivations for 
this study. 
descr ipt ive  gives an overview of the graphic or 
identifies its main visual aspect: for exam- 
ple, using a title or a legend, it describes 
the data on the X or Y axis or the general 
tendency (increase or decrease). Often this 
description identifies a selection criteria for 
the data such as Ten OCDE countries hav- 
ing the highest percentage of adults regis- 
tered to a University which indicate that 
the graphics only gives a partial view of 
the data. 
This theme is mainly associated with read- 
ing (73%) and evolution intentions (22%). 
quant i ta t ive  messages select the raw data 
that should interest he reader because, for 
example, the reader is directly concerned 
with this value: for a bar chart giving 
the annual income of a group of cities The 
annual income of a Vancouver .family was 
59 7005 in 1993 is particularly interesting 
for somebody who lives in the Vancouver 
area or if it illustrates an article that deals 
with Vancouver. 
It is interesting to see that many quanti- 
tative messages of our corpus refer to data 
that do not appear in the graphics; for ex- 
ample, the graphics hows a pie chart giv- 
ing a budget distribution for 1997 but the 
text compares those figures with the ones 
of the previous year. 
This theme is mainly associated with com- 
parison (46%), evolution (30%) and read- 
ing (23%) but it is almost always possi- 
ble to generate a quantitative message from 
any data either as it is or after some trans- 
formation such as a mean, a sum or by giv- 
ing the range of the values. 
dominat ion  expresses the highest or lowest 
values of the data such as Which company 
made the most or the least profit. Our cor- 
pus shows that sometimes the 2 or 3 domi- 
nating values are identified when these are 
65 
Descriptive 
Quantitative 
Domination 
Deductive 
Discriminant 
Qualitative 
Justificative 
reading comparison evolution correlation , distribution 
% 
98 
23 
11 
6 
46 
65 
16 
7 
2 
4 
30 
30 
3 
5 
31 
8 
33 
17 
3 
Total 132 146 107 37 20 
30 33 24 8 5 
total % 
134 30 
99 22 
85 19 
68 15 
38 9 
13 3 
5 1 
442 100 
100 
Table 1: Counts of themes and intentions of messages in our corpus of 411 French texts; some texts 
carry more than one intentions and theme 
clearly separated from the rest. The mes- 
sages can also indicate if the dominating 
values are for all possible cases. In Canada, 
adults in the Newfoundland o the least 
sport can only be said if all provinces are 
shown on the graphics. 
This theme is associated with comparison 
(76%) or distribution (20%) intentions; in 
the case of a fractional modifier, the domi- 
nating values are in terms of percentages 
but for distribution, domination is indi- 
cated by an interval instead of specific data. 
deduct ive messages draw a conclusion from 
the shape of the graphics or the values of 
the data; it can be either some form of 
correlation, a characteristic or a constant 
value in the data. These messages often 
use extra information to draw some con- 
clusion. For example, Provinces of western 
Canada had the highest employment rate 
for teenagers in 1993 makes use of geo- 
graphic knowledge to link seemingly uncon- 
nected data: British Columbia, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan are part of western Canada 
but that fact is not explicitly given in the 
data for each of the ten provinces. 
This theme is not closely linked with any 
particular intentions although correlation 
(49%) and comparison (24%) occur most 
often. 
d iscr iminant  messages identify a particular 
fact that distinguish this value from the 
others: we show an irregularity, a turning 
point in a curve is identified or an exception 
in an otherwise constant situation. 
This theme is associated with evolution 
(82%) and comparison (18%) intentions. 
qual i tat ive messages describe data in words 
such as rare, weak, strong, frequent, high, 
low; the shape of the curve can also be 
given. Here the judgement of the writer 
has the highest influence because the same 
value can qualified ifferently depending on 
the context. 
These messages are most often associated 
with evolution (62%) intentions but they 
can also be encountered with correlations 
(23%) and comparisons (15%). 
just i f icative messages identify causes for phe- 
nomena such as Why is a bar the highest?, 
Why the canadian dollar fell?, Why a given 
political party has more voting intentions?. 
As our corpus has been mostly built from 
small texts we do not have enough data to 
associate this theme with particular inten- 
tions. These kinds of messages are most 
often met in longer texts. 
3.1 Text  and graphics interact ion 
It is often thought and said in the multimedia 
generation folklore and in some graphic genera- 
tion texts that to obtain agood interaction be- 
tween text and graphics, that text should give 
informations that the graphics does not show. 
But in our corpus, we observed most often that 
the text merely reinforces what is already evi- 
dent in the graphics. For example, 29% of texts 
associated with a comparison intention, there 
is a mention of the highest value as to say to 
the reader: "Yes, what you see in this graph- 
66 
ics is really what is important". Redundancy 
only occurs when the text repeats exhaustively 
all the information and not when it pinpoints 
some important facts already "obvious" in the 
graphics. 
Cohesion between text and graphics does not 
depend mainly on the type of graphics (bar 
chart, pie chart, etc.) but more on the type 
of data on each axis. For example, in a graphic 
illustrating the sentence There are more gradu- 
ates in the highest salary brackets, data might 
be represented in salary intervals that can either 
be shown as bars, as columns, as an area under 
a curve or even as pie pieces. Thus each type of 
data has its own lexicon to insure cohesion: ten- 
dencies and evolution refer to a temporal axis 
no matter if the graphics is a curve or a bar 
chart. 
In our corpus, there are few coreferences to 
visual elements of the graphics, but we believe 
that this phenomenon is specific to our domain 
of statistical data. We are quite sure that in 
the domain of instructional texts, references to 
graphical elements occur more often. 
3.2 Lessons learned for automat ic  
generat ion  
From this corpus study, we developped some 
rules for selecting appropriate comments asso- 
ciated with the graphics chosen by PostGraphe 
while not overburdening the user with special 
annotations for the data. But as we saw that 
the texts are used to pinpoint some important 
aspects of the data, we need to know the inter- 
ests of the user in much the same way as Post- 
Graphe needs to know the intentions of the user 
like the Vancouver example given in the previ- 
ous section. The system must also know if a set 
of nominal values form a complete numeration 
to affirm that a value is the lowest ranking or if 
it deals with the ten most important countries. 
There is also the problem of knowing if it is ap- 
propriate to mention the crossing point of two 
curve or not or to speak about the reversing of 
a tendency. 
Data must also be identified with sufficient 
detail to be described in the text. The system 
cannot infer that a given percentage is the rate 
of persons charged of impaired driving without 
being given explicitly. 
The system must also be aware of the ap- 
propriate vocabulary to qualify certain types of 
67 
data. For example 5% might be qualified as 
low for certain income tax rate but might be 
thought as high if it deals with an inflation rate 
in North America these days. 
Messages that draw a general conclusion such 
as Canadian families have been quick to adopt 
new information technologies in their home are 
quite difficult to generate automatically. The 
same can be said of justifications or links with 
the outside world such as those found in stock 
market reports (Kukich, 1983). For example, 
it is impossible to generate The price of gold 
dropped because of the BRE-X scandal from the 
raw data of transactions on gold. 
For our text generation module, we will thus 
need a few more informations from the user such 
as the list of variables that are more important 
to the writer and a slightly more explicit naming 
of the variables. As these informations are of 
utmost importance for the writer, they should 
not be a burden to find and give. If they are, 
then that means that the intentions of the writer 
are not clear. 
4 Conc lus ion  
Our system is not the first one to combine 
text and graphics (see for example, multime- 
dia generation systems like COMET (Feiner and 
McKeown, 1991), SAGE (Roth et al, 1991) or 
WIP(Andr~ et al, 1993)). In our case, the out- 
put looks much simpler but our corpus analysis 
shows that, even in this case, the text genera- 
tion concepts necessary to combine with these 
seemingly simple graphics is quite involved be- 
cause it must rely on the intentions of the writer 
which are often left implicit. Even when they 
are given, complexity comes from the combina- 
tions of both media and intentions. 
Acknowledgments  
We thanks Massimo Fasciano for fruitful discus- 
sion about his work and his collaboration on this 
project. This project has been partially funded 
by a student grant from FCAR (Gouvernement 
du QuEbec) and a research grant from NSERC 
(Governement of Canada). 
Re ferences  
E. Andre, W. Finkler, W. Graf, T. Rist, 
A. Schauder, and W. Wahlster. 1993. WIP: 
the automatic synthesis of multimodal pre- 
sentations. In M. T. Maybury, editor, Intel- 
ligent Multimedia Interfaces, pages 75 - 93. 
AAAI Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Jacques Bertin. 1983. Semiology of Graphics. 
The University of Wisconsin Press. Trans- 
lated by William J. Berg. 
William S. Cleveland. 1980. The Elements of 
Graphing Data. Wadsworth Advanced Books 
and Software. 
Marc Corio. 1998. SElection de l'information 
pour la g6n~ration de texte associ~ ~ un 
graphique statistique. Master's thesis, Uni- 
versit6 de Montr6al. 
M. Fasciano and G. Lapalme. 1998. Intentions 
in the coordinated generation ofgraphics and 
text from tabular data. submitted to Natural 
Language Engineering, page 27p., January. 
Massimo Fasciano. 1996. Gdndration intdgrde 
de textes et de graphiques tatistiques. Ph.D. 
thesis, Universit6 de Montreal. 
S. Feiner and K. McKeown. 1991. Automating 
the generation ofcoordinated multimedia ex- 
planations. Multimedia Information Systems, 
24(10):33-41, October. 
Karen Kukich. 1983. Knowledge-b'ased report 
generation: A technique for automatically 
generating natural language reports from 
databases. In Proceedings of the A CM SIGIR 
Meeting, pages 246-250. ACM. 
Steven F. Roth, Joe Mattis, and Xavier Mes- 
nard. 1991. Graphics and natural anguage 
as components of automatic explanation. In 
Joseph W. Sullivan and Sherman W. Tyler, 
editors, Intelligent User Interfaces, Frontier 
Series, chapter 10. ACM Press. 
Gene Zelazny. 1989. Dites-le avec des 
graphiques. Interl~ditions. 
68 
