"I just played that a minute ago!:" Designing User Interfaces for 
Audio Navigation 
Ju l ia  Hirschberg,  John Choi, Chr ist ine Nakatan i ,  and Steve Whi t taker  
AT&T Labs - Research 
Florham Park NJ 07932 
(j ulia,choi,chn,stevew)@research.att . orn 
The current popularity of multimodal information 
retrieval research critically assumes that consumers 
will be found for the multimodal information thus 
retrieved and that interfaces can be designed that 
will allow users to search and browse multimodal 
information effectively. While there has been con- 
siderable ffort given to developing the basic tech- 
nologies needed for information retrieval from au- 
dio, video and text domains, basic research on how 
people browse and search in any of these domains, 
let alne in some combination, has lagged behind. In 
developing the SCAN (Spoken Content-based Audio 
Navigation) system to retrieve information from an 
audio domain, we have attempted tostudy the prob- 
lems of how users navigate audio databases, hand in 
hand with the development of the speech and in- 
formation retrieval technologies which enable this 
navigation3 
SCAN was developed initially for the TREC-6 
Spoken Document Retrieval (SDR) task, which em- 
ploys the NIST/DARPA HUB4 Broadcast News cor- 
pus. However, we are also developing a search and 
browsing system for voicemail access, over the tele- 
phone and via a GUI interface. To this end, we have 
built several user interfaces to both the voicemail 
and news domains, which we are employing in a se- 
ries of laboratory experiments designed to identify 
limiting and enabling features of audio search and 
browsing interfaces. We want to examine the fol- 
lowing questions: a) how do people want to search 
audio data? what sort of search and play capabil- 
ities do they make most use of, when given several 
alternatives? b) do people search different sorts of 
audio data (e.g., familiar versus unfamiliar) differ- 
ently? c) do people perform different types of audio 
search task (e.g. finding a single fact vs. summariz- 
ing a longer audio document, or finding an audio) 
differently? d) what are the major barriers to effi- 
ciency of audio search? what additional aids might 
t The SCAN audio browsing and retrieval system has been 
under development since June 1997 at AT&T Labs - Re- 
search, and represents collaborative work by Don Hindle, Ivan 
Magrin-Chagnolleau, Fernando Pereira, Amit Singhal, and 
the authors, with much additional help from Andrej Ljolje, 
Aaron Rosenberg and S. Parthasarathy. 
help to overcome these? e) what design principles 
underly the creation of effective interfaces to audio 
databases? 
In this paper we present a brief overview of the 
SCAN system, describe several browsing prototypes 
and the different aspects of audio browsing/retrieval 
they have been designed to test, and present results 
of two sets of experiments involving their use. We 
then describe two novel browsers, developed from 
the results of these experiments, which employ doc- 
ument segmentation information and errorful auto- 
matic speech recognition transcription as aids to au- 
dio browsing, and briefly outline additional experi- 
mental work on their use. 
1 The  SCAN System 
SCAN was developed for the TREC-96 SDR task, 
a known item information retrieval (IR) task from 
approximately 47hours of the NIST/DARPA HUB4 
Broadcast News/SDR speech corpus. Like most sys- 
tems participating in this task, SCAN uses auto- 
matic speech recognition (ASR) techniques to pro- 
duce an (errorful) transcription of the speech and 
then applies text-based IR techniques on the tran- 
scription to rank the corresponding speech docu- 
ments as to their relevance to a given text query. 
Results of the IR ranking are returned to the user via 
one of several interfaces, peech or text-transcription 
driven, which are described below. 
The system architecture is shown in Figure 1. 
Speech documents, labeled by hand in the SDR 
Vzzz 
Figure 1: Architecture of the SCAN audio brows- 
ing/retrieval system. 
data, are first run through an intonational phrase 
41 
detection procedure, to segment stories into princi- 
pled "chunks" of speech. This initial segmentation 
provides the ASR engine with manageable units of 
speech to recognize, and later provides users with 
manageable units of speech to listen to. Each phrase 
identified is then classified as to its channel condi- 
tions, so that the most appropriate acoustic mod- 
els can be applied during recognition; this classifica- 
tion is done by assigning log-likelihood scores based 
upon a partition of the data into 'high', 'medium', 
and 'low' fidelity speech (corresponding to 'studio 
8K speech', '8K speech recorded under other con- 
ditions', and '4K telephone speech' - all recorded 
without background noise or music) and noise (all 
speech recorded with noise or music). The rec- 
ognizer employs a time-synchronous beam search 
with continuous density, three-state, left-to-right, 
context-dependent Hidden Markov phone models. 
The production of word sequences from phones is 
implemented using weighted finite-state transduc- 
ers. Recognition hypotheses are output as word lat- 
tices. Several anguage models have been developed 
from the 116 million word SDR corpus, including 
standard backoff bigram (6.1 million) and trigam 
(9.4 million) models and a compacted trigram model 
which has 16% lower perplexity and which is 60% 
smaller than the bigram model. We use the SMART 
IR system, developed for text-based retrieval using 
the vector space model. SMART tokenizes the tran- 
scribed audio, removes common stop words (e.g. the, 
o\]), normalizes word variants (e.g. persons ~ per- 
son), and weights term occurrences based upon doc- 
ument length and word frequency. SMART scores 
for 'hits' within a document are made available to 
the user interface, as well as the ranking of docu- 
ments retrieved for a query. Two user interfaces cur- 
rently exist for SCAN, a speech-based interface, and 
a text-based interface. Both of these interfaces re- 
flect lessons learned from our earlier audio browsing 
experiments with simpler prototypes and a voicemail 
browsing and retrieval task. 
2 Audio-Based Browsing and 
Retrieval 
In recent years, various systems have been built 
to enable capture and browsing of spoken conver- 
sational data from meetings and recorded lectures 
(Hindus, Schmandt, and Horner, 1993; Kazman et 
al., 1996; Moran et al, 1997; Wolf, Rhyne, and 
Briggs, 1992; Whittaker, Hyland, and Wiley, 1994), 
and personally dictated information (Degen, Man- 
der, and Salomon, 1992; Stifelman et al, 1993). 
Other systems allow search of multimedia archives of 
television programmes (Hauptmann and Witbrock, 
1997; Shahraray, 1995) and videomail (Jones et al, 
1996). While extensive valuations of this technol- 
ogy remain to be carried out, naturalistic studies of 
audio browsing systems demonstrate heir effective- 
ness in helping users produce accurate meeting sum- 
maries (Moran et al, 1997; Whittaker, Hyland, and 
Wiley, 1994; Wilcox, Schilit, and Sawhney, 1997). 
These and other studies also showed that indexed 
audio produces more accurate recall, although users 
may take longer to retrieve information (Kazman 
et al, 1996; Whittaker, Hyland, and Wiley, 1994). 
Several factors that may influence browsing behav- 
ior have been identified: (a) familiarity with subject 
matter: knowledgeable users are more likely to skip 
portions of the audio record when replaying (Moran 
et al, 1997) and they generate more effective queries 
when searching the record (Kazman et al, 1996); (b) 
type of retrieval task: audio search behaviors differ 
when users are trying to summarize as opposed to 
extract verbatim information from the audio record 
(Moran et al, 1997; Whittaker, Hyland, and Wiley, 
1994); (c) presence and type of audio indices pro- 
vided: cue utility is esoteric, with different users re- 
lying on different types of cue (Kazman et al, 1996); 
(d) availability of segmental information: users find 
it easier to navigate the record when structural in- 
formation is provided (Arons, 1994). However, these 
studies also identify severe difficulties that users ex- 
perience with speech browsing and search which may 
compromise the utility of these systems. The first 
problem is navigational: users often report losing 
track of the current audio context (Stifelman, 1996; 
Arons, 1994), and being unable to determine the se- 
quence and structure of different elements of the au- 
dio record (Gould, 1983; Haas and Hayes, 1986). A 
second set of problems concern search: users seem 
to be poor at generating effective key word search 
queries, and find it hard to exploit system-generated 
key word indices. These problems are exacerbated 
when search material is unfamiliar (Kazman et al, 
1996). 
2.1 The Exper iment Design 
In our first set of experiments we focussed on iden- 
tifying users' own search strategies when given a set 
of tasks involving access to a relatively small audio 
database and two relatively impoverished GUI inter- 
faces to that database. More specifically we wanted 
to first identify the strategies users employ to browse 
and search audio - -  e.g., how do users find infor- 
mation in audio? Do they sample small segments 
or listen to large chunks? Second, we wanted to 
investigate the factors affecting these strategies - -  
e.g., do users search familiar information differently 
from novel material and if so how? Is their search 
strategy different when they are looking for verba- 
tim rather than summary information? Does provid- 
ing segmental information aid search significantly? 
Do other kinds of cues or indices promote ffective 
search? Third, we hoped to explore users' memory 
and mental models of audio and investigate the re- 
42 
lationship between memory and search strategies - -  
do users with more accurate models search audio 
more effectively, and what promotes good memory? 
We based our experiments on findings from a 
naturalistic study of over 800 voicemail users, in 
which we identified a set of strategies people used 
to access a real audio archive, and documented 
the problems users experience in accessing that 
archive (Hirschberg and Whittaker, 1997; Whit- 
taker, Hirschberg, and Nakatani, 1998). In our lab- 
oratory experiments we focussed first on how access 
is affected by two factors, task type and familiarity 
of material. While previous research as suggested 
that these factors affect browsing, no detailed eval- 
uation has been done. Second, we investigated the 
impact of two browser features, topic structure and 
play duration. Although these features have been 
implemented in previous browsers, their impact on 
browsing and their interaction with task and famil- 
iarity has not been systematically tested. Our hy- 
potheses were that a) search efficiency (i.e. number 
of search operations and search time) depends on 
the amount of speech information users must access: 
summary tasks requiring access to an entire topic 
will less efficient han search for two specific facts, 
which in turn will be less efficient than search for 
one fact; b) familiar material will elicit more efficient 
search; c) providing information about where topics 
begin will increase the efficiency of search; and, d) 
short duration fixed play intervals will be used for 
identifying relevant topics, whereas longer fixed play 
durations will be used for search within a topic. 
Fourteen people were given a speech archive, con- 
sisting of eight voicemail messages, or topics, ap- 
pended together in one audio file 236.3 seconds long. 
We chose this domain for our study, both because we 
were interested in the specific application, and be- 
cause Voicemail message retrieval is an example of a 
real application of audio search and retrieval, which 
we felt would be familiar to our users. Users ac- 
cessed the archive to answer sixteen questions about 
the eight topics. These questions were based on re- 
trieval tasks identified as common in our naturalistic 
study of voicemail users. There were three types of 
task: Four questions required users to access one 
specific fact, e.g. a date or phone number from 
a topic ( l fact),  a further four required access of 
two such facts (2fact), and eight questions required 
users to reproduce the gist of a topic (summary) .  
The first eight questions required users to ac- 
cess each of the eight topics once, and questions 9
through 16 required each topic to be accessed again. 
To investigate the effects of familiarity we compared 
users' performance on the first eight versus the sec- 
ond eight of the sixteen questions. 
Users were given one of two GUI browsers: ba- 
sic and topic. These are shown in Figure 2. Both 
Figure 2: Basic and Topic Audio Browsers 
browsers represent the entire speech archive as a hor- 
izontal bar and permit random access to it: users can 
select any point in the archive and play from that 
point (e.g. inserting the cursor halfway across the 
bar begins play halfway through the archive). For 
both browsers, users then select one of three play 
durations: play short (3 seconds), play long (10 sec- 
onds) and p lay to end (unrestricted play until play 
is manually halted by the user). The topic  browser  
further allows the user to select a given topic by se- 
rial position (e.g. topic, or, message 1); play will 
then begin at the start of that topic/message. 
We used a simple GUI for our initial experiments, 
rather than testing a complex set of possible search 
features, for three reasons: First, data on accessing a 
real speech archive indicate that even highly experi- 
enced users make little use of sophisticated features 
such as scanning, speed up/slow down, or jump for- 
ward/back (Hirschberg and Whittaker, 1997). Sec- 
ond, informal evaluations of complex speech UIs re- 
veal that advanced browsing features are often not 
well understood by users, and do not necessarily 
improve search (Arons, 1994; Hauptmann and Wit- 
brock, 1997). Given the unclear benefits of complex 
features, we wanted to establish baseline data for 
speech retrieval using a simple prototype. Finally, 
the features we tested will most likely be part of any 
browsing interface, and thus are of general interest. 
Users were given 5-10 minutes on practice tasks 
before the experiment. After it, we gave users a 
memory test, asking them to recall the content, 
name of caller and serial position of each topic. We 
then administered a questionnaire eliciting reactions 
to browser features and comments about the tasks. 
We logged the number and type of each play opera- 
tion, duration and location of played speech within 
the archive, and time to answer each question. The 
results for each hypothesis follow and all differences 
discussed are statistically significant at p i 0.05, us- 
ing ANOVA. 
43 
2.2 Experimental Results 
As we had expected, 1fact tasks were answered more 
efficiently than both other tasks (see Table 1). How- 
ever, contrary to expectations, ummary  was more 
efficient han 2fact,  despite requiring access to more 
information. The results indicate that performance 
depends both on the type and the amount of infor- 
mation users must access. User comments revealed 
why 2fact were so difficult: with summaries it was 
possible to remember several pieces of approximate 
information. 2fact questions required complex nav- 
igation within topic and the additional precision re- 
quired to retain verbatim information often meant 
that users forgot one fact while searching for the 
second. They then found it hard to relocate the fact 
they had just forgotten. The user logs reveal prob- 
lems of forgetting and relocating prior facts. In the 
course of answering each 2fact usrquestion users ac- 
tually played the two target facts a combined total 
of 7.9 times. In contrast arget facts for l fact  tasks 
were only accessed 1.5 times and topics 2.9 times for 
summary  tasks. 
As we had suspected, in general, familiar material 
elicited more efficient search. To investigate more 
deeply just how this effect was produced, we then 
separated overall search operations into: the identifi- 
cation of the relevant topic and the actual extraction 
of the information required to complete the task, i.e., 
finding the answer within the target topic. We then 
found that familiarity only improved the speed of 
topic identification, but had no effect on informa- 
tion extraction once the relevant source had been 
identified. 
Users made frequent use of topic boundary infor- 
mation. Although random access was available with 
the topic browser, users only employed it for 33% 
of their access operations. Furthermore, users' com- 
ments about the topic boundary feature were highly 
positive. Despite this positive feedback however, 
we found that topic-based access seemed less effi- 
cient than random access: users with access to topic 
delimiters took more operations although less time 
to answer questions than other users. Why might 
this counter-intuitive r sult have occurred? Post- 
hoc tests showed that topic browser users had worse 
memory for the eight topics than simple browser 
users. Users of the basic browser reported mak- 
ing strenuous efforts to learn a mental model of the 
archive. In contrast, reliance on topic structure may 
permit topic browser users never to do so. 
Play duration behavior was independent of 
whether search was within or outside topic. Further- 
more, there was little use of either of the fixed play 
operations: all users preferred unrestricted play. In 
the final questionnaire, users reported that fixed du- 
ration options reduced their comprehension bytrun- 
cating topic playback in unpredictable places. They 
preferred the greater control of unrestricted play, 
even though this meant the overhead of stopping 
play explicitly. 
From these experiments we conclude, first, that 
users were much better at comprehending the over- 
all structure of the archive, including the order and 
gist of topics, than they were at navigating more lo- 
cally, within a given topic, to find particular pieces of 
information. They were unable, for example, to re- 
locate previously accessed information within topic 
for 2fact tasks, and showed no familiarity effects for 
search within topic. Second, our sampling results 
suggest hat users overwhelmingly reject fixed dura- 
tion skims of salient speech information, when given 
an alternative more within their control. Instead of 
fixed interval skimming, users prefer to access alient 
speech by controlling the precise playback duration 
themselves, even though this may involve more ef- 
fort on their part to start and stop play. And third, 
providing topic boundaries may be of limited value: 
although users all like this feature (and those who 
participated in the basic browsing condition specifi- 
cally requested it), heavy use of such signposts may 
make it more difficult for users to learn the con- 
tents of the archive. It appeared that the segmenta- 
tion provided was at too coarse a level of granular- 
ity to provide much additional navigational power; 
the general topic structure of the archive as a whole 
could be learned easily without it. 
3 Segmentat ion  and  Transcr ip t ion  
A ids  to  Aud io  Nav igat ion  
The results of our basic and topic browser studies 
led us to propose two further browser prototypes, 
providing different ypes of additional, signposting 
information that might be helpful in local, as well 
as global navigation tasks. Since our goal was to 
permit users to browse much larger databases than 
eight voicemail messages, we also suspect that in- 
creasing the size of the database might increase the 
importance of some form of topic segmentation. 
The first browser we developed provided a more 
sophisticated notion of topic segment han simple 
message boundaries, and is shown in Figure 3. 
In our early study of heavy voicemail users we 
had learned anecdotally that callers who are used to 
doing business via voicemail believe that they and 
other such callers typically leave their messages in 
certain standard ways, with return telephone num- 
bers and names at the beginning and end of mes- 
sages, for example, and with content arranged in 
somewhat predictable fashion. So we prepared hand 
labelings of our test voicemail messages, identifying 
the following parts within each message: greeting, 
"Hi, J im"; caller identification, "It's Valerie from 
the Customer Care committee"; topic, "I'm calling 
about the meeting next week"; deliverables, "Can 
44 
Task Number of Operations Solution Time 
1fact 
2fact 
summary 
familiar 
unfamiliar 
topic 
no topic 
2.4 
4.1 
2.9 (F -- 7.43) 
2.1 
4.1 (F = 35.5) 
3.7 
2.5 (F = 5.09) 
23.0 
37.6 
32.3 (F = 11.7) 
22.5 
40.1 (F = 36.6) 
30.0 
32.5 (F = 6.60) 
Table 1: Effects of Task, Familiarity and Topic Structure on Retrieval Efficiency, with Relevant F ANOVA 
Values 
Figure 3: Voicemail Structural Browser 
you call Joan and make sure she'll have the num- 
bers by then?"; and closing "Bye now." While we 
have tested this interface only informally, the addi- 
tion of semantic ategories as signposts to brows- 
ing through a series of messages seems much more 
useful than simply iterating through messages by 
start of message. A browse through caller identify- 
ing phrases, for example, quickly identifies messages 
by caller, while browsing through topics or deliver- 
ables serves the same function by topic. And playing 
greeting, caller id, topic, deliverables, and closing 
provides a very effective summary of many message. 
Of course, even this outwardly simple identification 
of topic structure is beyond the capability of exist- 
ing technology. However, we are currently collecting 
and annotating a voicemail corpus with the goal of 
adding this type of structural browsing capability to 
the retrieval capabilities provided by our ASR/IR 
search engine. 
The second browser we developed in order to ex- 
periment with new types of navigational ids to 
audio browsing makes use of the (errorful) ASR 
transcription produced in order to carry out IR in 
our system. This browser is depicted in Figure 4. 
The text-aided browser is implemented for the SDR 
Broadcast News corpus and consists of three main 
components: a programs overview window, a speech 
feedback window, and a player window. The pro- 
grams overview presents the results of the IR search 
RZSUtTS 
_,T~__ . . . . . . . .  i . i .+~T ................... ~L ._ . . ' : _ _~_ .~L . . . . . .Z~"~ ..."_'~ ........................................................ 
i l ~PI  ~11 Th ing*  .C4ml$41~irld l i6 /17 I I  21i.73 192.14 611 
: MPI 111 Thl ? Conl+dqlrld IS /S l  16 I g . ? l  171.17 34 
4 MPR * I I  Th ing ,  COn l ld l r ld  15/3 \ [  i i  1"7.85 i++.11 21 
S CNN T~ +ld  Tod l  v 17/12 24 ~S. :S  l iB .S2  I I  
lnC ~Id  i~ ,  b ~/ lS  IS 14.S+ 157.12 7 
1 ca  Ear l  v P r tmt l l l  k IS / IS  6 1'4,20 115.96 14 
8 I~PR/PR I ~ l rk l lp  I l ee  I i i ; I  12 G 13,35 178?51 7 
n OHM ~l~l l~  ~ l  16/11 4 13.11 93.13 H 
~,nton ' i  ~ . . . . .  m.R . i r  . i ra . re .  \[ I I I . ,m.  , I ,~ .  : H .  . | ,  , I I I 
&~ Transh ip1  s 
~e  i luK oJ th l  p r l s i~ l l  lot  b l ing ks dvcis lvl  iD4 ~k  ? i .. 
"1 belt0,,* me ~7.~.~.~ p~opk~ c:sr~d 4e~l~ ~ how m ~  wewed m ~ wodd ~ I b~l~v*  me i 
p la ls ld*nt  c f in tan 's . ,  :p :  po i~y  tllC:K rlclDrCl of  we lk~@ls  IU't?I Is. Gt41dlks'l'l Imcl double  t~X b4en.~, .~Qnl l  I 
~r  ~t  (4voted ~ s~.~u s for ci1JM ~ .~d i~rk :~ p4ww~r ~ p~o l?  tn h i*acl~,~ no doubt ~,bout plf~e~ men" i 
i "by me p~e~? po l~ to, yard ~rm k~a s~ ~ ~ i ~ ~ me s~ e d d l ~  Nt  I~t?  ~s~n ?:@pz~bon 
Figure 4: Text-Aided Audio Browser 
on the corpus in the form of a list of stories ranked 
in order of their relevance to a text input query. The 
top ten most relevant stories are displayed, in this 
version of the interface. For each story, the title of 
the program from which the story comes, the date of 
the broadcast, and all instances of keywords in the 
story that were deemed relevant to the query are dis- 
played. Clicking on one of the program/story but- 
tons loads the corresponding speech into the speech 
? feedback window, along with a time-aligned cursor, 
which shows the location of the story in the speech 
stream. The player window then provides controls 
for navigation and play within the displayed pro- 
gram, permitting the following functionality: a play 
button with plays from the point selected in the 
speech feedback window; a stop play button; a move- 
to-beginning button; buttons which skip forward in 
the speech by intonational phrase or larger intona- 
tionally defined units and buttons which skip back- 
45 
ward in the same units. We have devised a series 
of tasks appropriate to the broadcast news domain 
but similar to the tasks used in our voicemail study, 
and will use this interface to test the utility of au- 
tomatically derived transcription and keyword iden- 
tification, as well as acoustically identified prosodic 
units, in aiding local navigation. 
4 D iscuss ion  
A central problem with current access to large au- 
dio databases i  the need to listen to large amounts 
of relevant data; the human eye skims much more 
quickly than is possible for the human ear to do. 
Also, when skimming text, humans typically are pro- 
vided with many conventional orthographic and for- 
matting guides, such as headings and paragraphs. 
Our study of audio browsing in even a small au- 
dio corpus demonstrates that, while some kind of 
navigational ids seem necessary to provide the con- 
text which permits successful navigation, obvious 
signposts uch as topicimessage boundaries may be 
less helpful than users expect hem to be and per- 
haps even counter-productive to users acquiring a 
basic understanding of their data. Given this re- 
sult, we are exploring alternatives to simple topic 
markers, including semantic structural information, 
potentially errorful transcription and key word re- 
trieval, and acoustic segmentation, particularly as a 
means of enhancing users' ability to extract he in- 
formation they seek from the audio data that has 
been presented to them. 
References  
Arons, B. 1994. Interactively Skimming Speech. 
Ph.D. thesis, MIT Media Lab. 
Degen, L., R. Mander, and G Salomon. 1992. 
Working with audio: Integrating personal tape 
recorders and desk-top computers. In Human 
Factors in Computing Systems: CHI '92 Confer- 
ence Proceedings, pages 413-418. 
Gould, J. 1983. Human factors challenges: The 
speech filing system approach. ACM Transactions 
on Office Information Systems, 1(4), October. 
Haas, C. and J. Hayes. 1986. What did i just say? 
reading problems in writing with the machine. Re- 
search in the Teaching of English, 20(1). 
Hauptmann, A. and M. Witbrock. 1997. News-on- 
demand multimedia information acquisition and 
retrieval. In M. Maybury, editor, Intelligent Mul- 
timedia Information Retrieval. AAAI Press. 
Hindus, D., C. Schmandt, and C. Homer. 1993. 
Capturing, structuring, and representing ubiqui- 
tous audio. ACM Transactions on Information 
Systems, 11:376-400. 
Hirschberg, Julia and Steve Whittaker. 1997. 
Studying search and archiving in a real audio 
database. In Proceedings of the AAA11997 Spring 
Symposium on Intelligent Integration and Use of 
Text, Image, Video and Audio Corpora, Stanford, 
March. AAAI. 
Jones, G. J. F., J. T FFoote, K. Sparck Jones, and 
S. J. Young. 1996. P~etrieving spoken documents 
by combining multiple index sources. In Proceed- 
ings of SIGIR 96, Zurich, August. ACM. 
Kasman, R., P~. A1Halimi, W. Hunt, and M. Mantei. 
1996. Four paradigms for indexing video confer- 
ences. IEEE Multimedia, 3(1):63-73. 
Moran, T. P., L. Palen, S. Harrison, P. Chiu, 
D. Kimber, S. Minneman, W. Van Melle, and 
P. Zellweger. 1997. "i'll get that off the au- 
dio": A case study of salvaging multimedia meet- 
ing records. In Human Factors in Computing 
Systems: CHI '97 Conference Proceedings, pages 
202-209. 
Shahraray, Behzad. 1995. Scene change detection 
and content-based sampling of video sequences. 
In Robert J. Safranek and Arturo A. Rodriguez, 
editors, Proceedings of the SPIE Conference on 
Digital Video Compression: Algorithms and Tech- 
nologies, February. 
Stifelman, L. 1996. Augmenting real-world objects: 
A paper-based audio notebook. Human Factors 
in Computing Systems: CHI '96 Conference Com- 
panion, pages 199-200. 
Stifelman, L., B. Arons, C. Schmandt, and E. Hul- 
teen. 1993. Voicenotes: A speech interface for a 
hand-held voice notetaker. In Human Factors in 
Computing Systems: CHI '93 Conference Proceed- 
ings, pages 179-186. 
Whittaker, S., P. Hyland, and M. Wiley. 1994. 
Filochat: Handwritten otes provide access to 
recorded conversations. In Human Factors in 
Computing Systems: CHI '93 Conference Proceed- 
ings, pages 271-277, New York. ACM Press. 
Whittaker, Steve, Julia Hirschberg, and Christine 
Nakatani. 1998. All talk and all action: strate- 
gies for managing voicemail messages. In Human 
Factors in Computing Systems: CHI '98 Confer- 
ence Proceedings, Los Angeles. 
Wilcox, L. D., B. N. Schilit, and N. Sawhney. 1997. 
Dynomite: A dynamically organized ink and au- 
dio notebook. In Human Factors in Computing 
Systems: CHI '97 Conference Proceedings. 
Wolf, C., J. Rhyne, and L. Briggs. 1992. Communi- 
cation and information retrieval with a pen-based 
meeting support ool. In Proceedings of CSCW- 
92, pages 322-329. 
46 
