Discourse Markers in Spontaneous Dialogue: 
A Corpus based study of Japanese and English 
Masahito KAWAMORU Takeshi KAWABATA t 
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, 
NTT Basic Research Laboratories t 
kawamori~atom.brl.ntt.co.jp kaw~idea.brl.ntt.co.j p 
Akira SHIMAZU" 
Japan Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology" 
shimazu ~j aist. ac.j p 
Abstract 
A spontaneously spoken, natural Japanese discourse 
contains many instances of the so-called redundant in- 
terjections and of back-channel utterances. These ex- 
pressions have not hitherto received much attention and 
few systematic analyses have been made, since they 
were regarded as useless, spurious expressions. 
On the basis of the analysis of spoken dialogue cor- 
pus, we claim that these utterances have the charac- 
teristics of discourse markers, which delimit and define 
units of discourse. Our corpus consists of task-oriented 
dialogues conducted both in Jacanese and in English. 
The analysis of the Japanese c,:rpus shows that about 
half of the turns are started with these so-called redun- 
dant utterances, while the English corpus shows that 
about 25 % of the turns start with corresponding En- 
glish expressions. This suggests that at least in the case 
oi" Japanese, these so-called redundant utterances have 
much to do with units of discourse, the building blocks 
of discourse relations, and that they do indeed function 
as discourse markers. 
We show that these utterances comprise a well- 
defined category, characterizable in a regular manner 
by their prosodic properties. Prosodic patterns of dis- 
course markers occurring in the recorded corpus have 
been analyzed. Several pitch patterns have been found 
that characterize the most frequently used Japanese dis- 
course markers. Based on these characteristic pitch pat- 
terns, a system of discourse markers can be designed so 
that a relatively small number of basic forms are shown 
to give rise to most of the discourse markers, with into- 
nation patterns corresponding to the functions of dis- 
course markers. 
Introduction 
Japanese is an agglutinative language with predomi- 
nantly verb final sentence patterns. It is to be ex- 
pected, therefore, that Japanese sentence units are 
rather easy to recognize, and textbooks and written 
forms of Japanese indeed vindicate such an expecta- 
tion. 
A spontaneously spoken Japanese discourse, however, 
is full of features which are not part of its written coun- 
terpart: phrases ending with conjunctions, interjections 
with verbs attached, unfinished utterances and other 
disfluencies. 
Aizuchi, or back-channel utterances, and other so- 
called redundant utterances, such as hai, un, anoo 
and ee, are especially abundant in Japanese discourse. 
These are often taken as the manifestation of the irreg- 
ularity and non-systematic nature of spoken language. 
Especially when one wants to recognize 'sentences' in
discourse, these utterances inevitably stand in one's 
way, destroying the sentential structures expected by 
grammar. Because of these utterances, from the stand 
point of the conventional grammar, clarifying such mat- 
ters as which utterances constitute one sentence and 
which utterances belong to two different sentence units 
becomes extremely difficult. If the task of discerning 
sentence units~ the building blocks of discourse, is dif- 
ficult, the difficulty of discerning discourse structure is 
enormous. 
If these utterances are really just noise, then they are 
hindrance to the understanding of discourse, and spo- 
ken discourse would be far more difficult for people to 
understand than written texts. But this flies in the face 
of the fact that people do communicate and understand 
each other in spoken language, and quite easily for that. 
Given that spoken language is full of such so-called 
redundant utterances and that people can nevertheless 
communicate rather easily, we have to conclude that 
these utterances are not just noise after all; their func- 
tion in discourse is effective, and they contribute some- 
what to the understanding of spoken discourse. We 
believe that these utterances have important functions 
in discourse, as what is called discourse markers. 
As was reported in \[Kawamori et al, 1994\], there are 
fair indications that these expressions play crucial roles 
in determining discourse structures, especially with re- 
spect to units of surface discourse as well as of speech 
acts and planning. Elucidating such roles can not only 
clarify syntactically relevant features of discourse but 
may shed light on intended meaning and other issues 
concerning pragmatics \[Takubo, 1994\]. Aside from the 
93 
fact that since spoken discourse is full of these expres- 
sions, one cannot avoid treating these phenomena in 
order to understand and explain the language in ac- 
tual use, we are interested in these utterances because 
they have particular functions, not required in written 
language but specifically called for in its spoken coun- 
terpart. 
In addition to these theoretical interests, clarify- 
ing these phenomena serves more practical purposes 
also. For example, constructing a truly friendly human- 
machine interface would require a systematic knowledge 
of these features. Moreover, since written language gen- 
erally lacks many discourse markers abundant in its 
spoken counterpart, interfaces between these two me- 
dia would invariably have to be able to handle discourse 
markers. For example, a machine designed to take the 
dictation of its human interlocutor could not do with- 
out the ability to discern these discourse markers, unless 
correct dictation means interspersing every phrase with 
ah's and uh's. The inability to handle these features 
would limit the capacity of an expert system \[Pollack 
et al, 1982\], \[Whittaker and Stenton, 1988\]. 
Corpus  
In order to analyze spontaneously spoken discourse, we 
have been collecting task-oriented dialogues. Although 
we are mainly concerned with spoken Japanese, we are 
also collecting English dialogues for comparison. The 
corpus is still growing. 
The Japanese corpus comprises 312 dialogues, whose 
total recording time is about 18 hours (1081 minutes). 
The recorded conversations are transcribed and the size 
of the resulting text is about 1 megabyte, which roughly 
corresponds to 500,000 characters in Japanese orthog- 
raphy and contains approximately 29,000 turns. The 
transcription is made using a tool that automatically 
segments peech data into units separated by pauses. 
Hence a turn is defined prosodically rather than syn- 
tactically or semantically. 
The English corpus comprises 77 dialogues. The 
recording time is about 4 hours, and the text size is 
about 400 kilobytes with approximately 5000 turns. 
The same tool is used for transcription. The tasks of 
the English dialogues are the same as those of aapanese. 
The subjects are all native speakers of the North Ameri- 
can variety of English, with varying degrees of exposure 
to Japanese culture and language. 
Japanese Discourse Markers  
Schiffrin \[Schiffrin, 1987\] gives the operational defini- 
tion of discourse markers as "sequentially dependent 
elements which bracket units of talk", units that in- 
clude such entities as sentences, propositions, speech 
acts, and tone units, the exact nature of which she delib- 
erately leaves vague. She also suggests that, conversely, 
discourse markers themselves may define "some yet 
undiscovered units of talk". \[Hirschberg and Litman, 
1987\] state that they "may, instead of making a 'se- 
mantic' contribution to art utterance (i.e., affecting its 
truth conditions), be used to convey explicit informa- 
tion about the structure of a discourse." Other terms 
used to designate discourse markers are 'cue phrase', 
'clue word', and 'discourse particles'. Examples of En- 
glish discourse markers are: okay, but, now, anyway, by 
the way, in any case, that reminds me. 
Unlike their English counterparts, many Japanese 
discourse markers are not lexical; they are not gener- 
ally regarded as comprising a well-defined category. For 
example, in English, such words as "well" and "now" 
not only function as discourse markers, but also have 
their inherent senses like "in a good manner" and "the 
present ime". Their status as 'words' are unquestion- 
able. Their Japanese counterparts, eeto and hal, on the 
other hand, have no other functions than as discourse 
markers. They have no 'meaning' by themselves, and 
they are never used in written language. 
This fact explains why little consensus exists among 
researchers a  to which 'words' constitute Japanese dis- 
course markers and why these utterances have conven- 
tionally been bundled into interjections, given up as 
standing "outside the domain of the well-formed sen- 
tence itself," \[Martin, 1975\]. 
Another consequence of this fact is that the disam- 
biguation between lexical and non-lexical uses. or that 
between on-cue and cue usages, of words used as dis- 
course markers does not constitute a particularly urgent 
problem in Japanese, because most of the time there is 
nothing to be disambiguated. On the other hand, the 
question of distinguishing among the different functions 
born by discourse markers becomes important, since 
one discourse marker can have different functions de- 
pending on the context or its prosodic features. 
Although there is no received categorization, 
Japanese discourse markers can naturally be divided 
into two main groups: phrasal and non-phrasal mark- 
ers. 
Phrasal markers are those phrases that are routinely 
used for conveying information about the structure of 
discourse. They are lexical phrases, like sore-kara-desu- 
ne 'and then' and sou.shimasu-to 'the case being so', 
or words, like toiuka 'rather' and yappari 'as expected', 
usually complex in form, with inherent meaning directly 
related to the discourse. 
Non-phrasal (particle) discourse markers can be fur- 
ther grouped into four categories: fillers, responsives, 
(sentence) final particles, and conjunctives and other 
adverbial expressions. The so-called redundant expres- 
sions and interjections belong to the first two categories. 
As was noted above, the expressions belonging to these 
categories are usually not recognized as part of the lan- 
guage proper, and therefore not given the status of mor- 
pheme. 
Sentence final particles are morphemes like -yo and - 
ne that are attached to the end of a sentence or a phrase 
94 
to express peaker's attitudes \[Kawamori, 1991\]. Their 
role in conversation is somewhat similar to that played 
by French quoi and German doch and jo. 
Other particles, mostly conjunctive in nature and 
expressing various discourse relations, like -node 'be- 
cause', -kedorno 'though', -to 'then', -ga 'but', also func- 
tion as discourse markers. Their functions are similar 
to those of ordinary conjunctives, but particles are more 
common in spoken language. They are not only used to 
connect sentences but also to end sentences with, indi- 
cating that in conversation they are more like sentence 
final particles than pure conjunctives. 
Conjunctive adverbials are expressions like ja (then), 
de 'then', ato 'in addition' - many of which are derived 
from conjunctions and conjunctive particles - that are 
used to express various relations between sentences. 
Discourse Markers and Units of Discourse 
That these non-phrasal markers are indeed discourse 
markers as defined by Schiffrin can be shown by the 
analysis of our corpus. We selected 59 dialogues from 
our Japanese corpus, and found out that 3,210, or 
49.3%, of the total turn of 6,507 start with either a filler 
or a responsive. On the other hand, 4,308, or 66.2%, of 
the turns end with a particle, filler, or responsive. This 
seems to suggest hat these expressions are indeed used 
to "bracket units of talk". 
These units are not necessarily sentences in the con- 
ventional grammatical sense, but are closer to what the 
traditional Japanese linguistics call bunse~su, or senten- 
tial clause, though strictly speaking, they are not what 
are usually regarded as well-formed bunsetsu. 
This also shows how precarious the status of sentence 
is in spoken Japanese discourse, as mentioned at the 
outset, since it is possible that in at least half of the 
time, a turn does not consist of a sentence. This sug- 
gests that the discourse structure of dialogue cannot be 
understood in terms of the traditional grammar based 
on sentence, or well-formed bunsetsu, \[Dohsaka and Shi- 
mazu, 1996\]. 
For comparison, we looked at 13 of the English dia- 
logues on a similar task, and found that 930, or 25.9 %, 
of the 3,584 turns start with uh, ah, OK, urn, or right. 
We did not specifically look at what comes at the end 
of each turn, but it appears that an English dialogue 
tends to have a longer turn with a finished sentence. 
Respons ives  and Fi l lers 
Since responsives and fillers are those expressions that 
have hitherto been categorized as jouchou-go (redun- 
dant words) or fuyou-go (unnecessary words) and 
hence regarded as redundant or needless \[Takagi et al, 
1993\],\[Kobayashi et al, 1993\], little attention has been 
paid to give a systematic account of their forms, much 
less their functions. But, as we said in the introduction, 
the elucidation of their exact status is more urgent, in 
that they occur so frequently in spoken language. In 
the following we look more closely at responsives and 
fillers and try to characterize their nature. 
Respons ives  are what \[Kawamori et al, 1994\] call 
interjectory responses and roughly correspond to what 
in Japanese are traditionally referred to as aizuchi, or 
back-channel utterances in English. These expressions 
are rather limited in their realization: there are only 
a few expressions belonging to this class in the Stan- 
dard Japanese. Their forms seem to be restricted to 
expressions with two morae. 
An example of a responsive discourse marker is 
hal, one of the most frequently used words in spoken 
Japanese as well as one of the most complex and diffi- 
cult to analyze. If used in response to a question, hai 
means a simple "yes", while if it is in reply to a request, 
it means an accepting "OK". When used by itself, at 
the beginning of a sentence, it usually means, "now" or 
"well". In addition to all these functions, it also has its 
most common use as an expression of acknowledgment, 
as does "uh-huh" in English. Of the responsives, hal is 
by far the most commonly used, and most neutral in 
style. 
F i l lers are those expressions which have ordinarily 
been taken as rather 'meaningless' or 'unimportant' .  
They are usually characterizable as consisting of one 
or two vowels, with or without consonants. Their syl- 
lable compositions are generally very simple. The ex- 
pressions of this class have functions, and forms, rather 
similar to the fillers in English, like mm and ah. Typical 
examples of fillers are anoo and eeto. 
Another type of fillers are shorter than the fillers dis- 
cussed above, and often amount o no more than a catch 
of voice. Examples are a and e. The phonological char- 
acteristics of this type of fillers seem to be somewhat 
similar to those of responsives, but the exact clarifi- 
cation is rather difficult because these expressions are 
uttered in extremely short duration, usually less than 
100 milliseconds, making it almost impossible to detect 
then as voiced sounds. 
Taxonomy o f  Respons ives  and  F i l l e rs  
The inventories of these discourse markers in litera- 
ture, such as listed by \[Takubo, 1994\], \[Kobayashi et 
al., 1993\], and \[Takagi e~ al., 1993\], together with the 
characterizing features discussed above, seem to sug- 
gest that these discourse markers can be classified in a 
simple way in terms of the three dimensions: the pho- 
netic form of the marker, the tone of a vowel, and the 
length of a vowel. More concretely, the following three 
can be offered as important aspects in classifying filler 
and responsive discourse markers: 
Sound forms 
These are the basic phonetic forms that constitute 
the realizations of discourse markers. These forms can 
be further divided into two groups in the following way: 
95 
Regular Type: (Type  R) This group is composed of 
those markers that are regularly constructed from 
two elements: the initial sound plus the main vowel. 
These discourse markers can be summarized in the 
following table. 
i \[ vowels 
!,,initial sound a e ua o 
I ' 1  a " e un  o 
/h /  ha he hun ho 
/m/ ma - mo 
In the table, the mark ' stands for a glottal stop; in 
practice it shows that there is no noticeable conso- 
nant, The 'vowel' un is so-called because it is not 
/u /  plus /n / ,  but rather a nasalised u. Note that the 
basic phonetic forms of both fillers and responsives 
are included in this group. The table indicates that 
there are 10 basic phonetic forms of discourse mark- 
ers, including o, ho, and mo. Those forms in the o 
column may not actually be fillers but simple inter- 
jections, for the usages of their actual instances eem 
to differ from those of the fillers. We include them in 
the table for the sake of completeness. 
Independent Type: (Type  I) The other group of 
sound forms is made up of those fillers/responsives 
with more than one morn that do not belong to the 
above regular type. These are small in number, and 
can be summarized as follows: 
hal, ano, kono, sono, eeto 
Note that to in eeto may be regarded as a separate 
particle, for unto and or-to are also possible. In fact, 
in familiar occasions, people often use such expres- 
sions as hal-fro and a-fro. If this is true then eeto 
should be regarded as ee plus to, and not as a single 
form. 
It is further to be noted that, again, responsives 
and fillers share a type. Consideration of the sound 
forms, therefore, leads us to believe that fillers and 
responsives somehow constitute a larger, more gen- 
eral category which comprises phonetically related, 
but prosodically and functionally distinct, elements. 
Length  
In addition, the length of a vowel is also to be consid- 
ered. In Japanese, the long vowel and its short coun- 
terpart are phonemically distinct so that a word with 
a short vowel is distinguished lexically from a corre- 
sponding word with a long vowel, as can be seen from 
obasan (aunt) and obaasan (grand mother). Similarly, a 
discourse marker with a short vowel often has different 
functional/semantical features than does its long vowel 
counterpart. The filler anoo with the long vowel oo is 
usually thought o be different, lexically and function- 
ally, from ano with the short o. 
Hence we add the following four features concerning 
the lengths of vowels in our inventory: 
? H+H (for a lengthened vowel at higher pitch), 
? L+L (for a lengthened vowel at lower pitch), 
? H- (for a short vowel with an abrupt stop at higher 
pitch), 
? L- (for a short vowel with an abrupt stop at lower 
pitch). 
Notice that + and - are used in a different manner 
from the way they are meant in \[Pierrehumbert and 
Hirschberg, 1990\]. With such an inventory of symbols 
for representation, we can describe the prosodic char- 
acteristics of Japanese discourse markers\[Kawamori et 
al., 1996\]. 
H+H F0 pat tern  (ee) 
S 
Figure 1: 
HL% F0 pat tern  (hai) 
% 
Q 
Figure 2: 
Any of the sound forms can take on one of these 
lengths, although some of them may not actually be 
used in discourse. For example, the sound form a often 
takes L-; this usually shows awareness or acknowledg- 
ment. It is often found in an utterance like the follow- 
ing: 
(1) a, wakam mashita 
L-  L% 
FILLER understand PAST 
'uh, OK.' 
a with the higher H-would usually imply some element 
of surprise. 
The long H+H accompanying a, often written as an, 
signals some kind of hesitation, as in: 
(2) aa, hai 
H+H HL% 
FILLER yes 
'well, yes.' 
Similarly, the other markers in Type R above may have 
either of the long or short tones. 
Those of Type I also can be realized with either a long 
vowel or a short one. ano as a filler is usually uttered 
with H+H, but it may  also have L-. Although hai is 
96 
'tt  ono Form L- H- H+H HLY, (L)H% 
a 
e 
hai 
ano  
Recognition 
Recognition 
Recognition Hesitation 
Recognition Hesitation 
Response 
Response Qu&tion 
- : - - Response Question 
- - Hesitation - - 
Table 1: Function and Prosodic Patterns of Markers 
usually short HL%, in a situation where one calls out to 
reply, H+H plus LX may be used. Table 1 summarizes 
these points succinctly. 
P i tch  
The two pitches, H and L, can be used to character- 
ize different markers. As noted above, a with H+H can 
signal hesitation, but the same a with HL%, also written 
aa, is usually taken as a responsive, albeit an impolite, 
or arrogant, kind. The sound form e with L-is usually 
interpreted in a similar way to what a with L-is inter- 
preted. But e with H-% is usually used to express a 
question, rather like English Pardon? or huh?. 
We analyzed another set of recorded dialogues and 
observed the pitch pattern of the token utterance of a 
responsive discourse marker. There were 308 token ut- 
terances of the form has. Of these 292 had the form 
HL%, as predicted. This is approximately 95 percent of 
the cases. There are 16 instances in which hai did not 
have HL% pattern. Of these, 8 were either immediately 
following or immediately followed by some other utter- 
ances, including two instances of hal hal. 
Single utterances of hal that do not have HL% pattern 
comprise fewer than 3 percent. These had the pattern 
HL+LS: or HL+L with the lengthening of the last vowel. 
There were 60 token utterances of un, which may be 
considered an informal counterpart of hal. Of these, 49, 
or approximately 82 percent, were of the pitch pattern 
HAY,. 
A possibly more interesting, and perhaps more chal- 
lenging, case is that of ee, for ee is both a filler and 
a responsive. Our result shows that there were 96 oc- 
curences of the token form ee, of which 76, or about 80 
percent, were of (L)H+H pattern. The HL% pattern com- 
prised fewer than 10 percent of the total 96, while other 
patterns counted 11, or slightly more than 10 percent. 
As it stands, this result does not refute our character- 
ization, but it only shows that ee may be used more 
often as a filler than a~ a responsive. The results are 
succinctly summarized in Table 2. 
This way of characterizing discourse markers, more 
precisely fillers and responsives, is interesting because 
it gives a good idea of the domain of discourse markers 
by systematically offering us a large sample of these 
expressions. 
As was noticed earlier in this paper, \[Takubo, 1994\] 
gives a rather comprehensive, though not exhaustive, 
Table 2a for hal 
I pat tern tl HL% others l \]total \] 
\[ 'number \] '292 16 t\[ 308 I 
percentage 94.~ "' 5.2 100 
Table 2b for un 
I .... pattern. II HLX others II t?t.al l 
I"number 711"49 i i II 60 l 
percentage  1.7  S.a li 100i 
Table 2c for ee 
pat{ern fl HL% I (L)H+H I ?t'hers IT ' t?tal  7I 
number 99.3 , 76 79.2 I 11 percentage 
Table 2: Pitch Patterns of Fillers and Responsives 
list of discourse markers, a list that arranges discourse 
markers into groups defined in terms of operational, 
or performative, concepts. \[Takagi et al, 1993\] and 
\[Kobayashi et al, 1993\] also give similar lists. It is 
worth noticing that all the discourse markers listed in 
these are accounted for in the categorization i  this sec- 
tion. 
Phor ic i ty  
Our taxonomy of discourse markers shows that there 
is a dividing line between two types of fillers. One of 
them is the type that is composed of such fillers as 
aL_,eL_, and ell_ ; the other is the long type, wh ich  
includes eetoH+ H and anooLH+H. The former may be 
called anaphoric because a member of this class is gen- 
erally uttered when there is an antecedent situation, 
either linguistic or otherwise, that triggers its utter- 
ance: a situation that is surprising, outstanding, or 
simply salient for some reason. The latter class, on 
the other hand, may be called cataphoric, for its mem- 
ber is usually used to prepare the listener, and possibly 
the speaker also, for imminent continuance of speech by 
signaling, for example, hesitation. Responsives are by 
definition anaphoric, because they always presuppose 
something to which they are used to reply. We call the 
property of being anaphoric or cataphoric phoricit~ of 
97 
that expression. 
This demarcation in fillers, along with the remark 
above about the more general, comprehensive cate- 
gory comprising both fillers and responsives, hows that 
there are in fact three distinctive categories among 
fillers and responsives: anaphoric fillers, cataphoric 
fillers, and responsives. Moreover there are three 
prosodic characteristics that correspond to these three 
categories: the typical prosody of an anaphoric filler is 
either L-or It-; that of a cataphoric filler is (L)H+H; and 
? that of a responsive is HLY,. This situation is summa- 
rized in Table 3. 
Whether the correspondence b tween the phoricity 
of an expression and its prosodic pattern is universal 
or not remains to be seen. It would be interesting to 
pursue this in comparison with other languages other 
than English and Japanese. 
The correlation between the typical prosodic charac- 
teristics of fillers and responsives and the three cate- 
gories discerned among them also defines the possibil- 
ity of linear precedence r lation among these discourse 
markers and discourse units. 
As noted above there are cases in which the speaker 
refers back to his own utterance with a hal. There are 
many examples of a with L-preceding hal. But it is rare 
to find ee with the H+It prosody followed by hai. The 
following are frequently observed sequences of discourse 
markers: 
in, hai),<a, a,,oo), <soudesu, ha/); 
while these are rarely observed: 
(hai, a), (eeto, e>, (soudesu, a). 
Summarizing, we get the following rough generaliza- 
tion: 
? Fillers with L-or  It-, the anaphoric fillers, such as 
a L- ,e L- ,  and e It-, come at the beginning of a 'unit'; 
? hal and other responsives with tIL% come at the end 
of a 'unit'. (Sometimes it may be the only unit.) 
? The cataphoric fillers, such as ano It + H,eH + ti, and 
eL + L, come in between some 'units'. 
Such generalization helps us to formulate a rule that 
possibly characterizes the way discourse markers occur 
in daily discourses. One possible way of doing so would 
be to posit a rule like the following: 
( r - ) ( ({L ) r  q- r) ' ,  UNIT)+(HLY,), 
where UNIT is some antecedently defined unit of dis- 
course, possibly bunsetsu, r is either H or L, the raised 
Phoriclty 
Filler i Cataphoric 
Anaphoric '
Responsive i Anaphoric 
\[ T)ne \[ Examples 
(L)It+It \[ ee, anoo 
L - ,H -  i a, e, ma, 
HL% I hal, ee, un 
Table 3: 
+ indicates the possibility of iterating the same ele- 
ment once or more times, and the raised * indicates the 
possibility of iterating the same element zero or more 
times. 
While imperfect as it stands, this rule 'defines' many 
surface strings as well-formed iscourses. For example, 
the following is well-formed according to this rule: 
(3) a anoo tokyoo-ni eeto detaindesuyo hal 
L- LH+H LH+H HL% 
Tokyo-TOWARD want-to-go-out 
'I want to go to Tokyo.' 
This characterization itself is rather too simple, and 
more work has to be done to improve upon it, a task 
which is beyond the scope of this paper and is to be 
taken up in a later work. But such a rule will be useful 
in devising a 'grammar' of the spontaneously spoken 
language taken in its totality, an attempt made by, for 
example, \[Nakano et al, 1994\]. Indeed, once a truly 
natural discourse is taken seriously, an attempt at such 
a grammar, and a formulation such as in this section, 
seems not only indispensable but also inevitable. 
Another thing to be noted is that such a rule un- 
derscores the fact that these expressions are not to be 
regarded as redundancies, but rather as legitimate dis- 
course markers, as has been claimed at the outset. 
Conc lud ing  Remarks  
We looked at Japanese discourse markers, comparing 
them with their English counterparts. Although many 
English discourse markers are phrasal or lexical, with 
independent s atus as words, many Japanese discourse 
markers are non-phrasal and some of them have been 
denied the status of being discourse markers, dismissed 
as redundant or spurious. 
We claimed, on the basis of the analysis of spoken 
dialogue corpus, that these utterances have the charac- 
teristics of discourse markers, which delimit and define 
units of discourse. Our corpus consists of task-oriented 
dialogues conducted both in Japanese and in English. 
The analysis of the Japanese corpus shows that about 
half of the turns are started with these so-called redun- 
dant utterances, while the English corpus shows that 
about 25 % of the turns start with corresponding En- 
glish expressions. This suggests that at least in the case 
of Japanese, these so-called redundant utterances have 
much to do with units of discourse, the building blocks 
of discourse relations, and that they do indeed function 
as discourse markers. 
We also examined the formal properties of these 
non-phrasal  discourse markers, fillers and responsives, 
specifically looking at their prosodic features. Our anal- 
ysis suggested that the intonational characteristics of
these markers are category-dependent, i  that markers 
of a category share similar intonational patterns. The 
existence of natural phonological demarcations among 
98 
the discourse markers uggests a systematic categoriza- 
tion of these expressions, a taxonomy of discourse mark- 
ers that may enable us to systematize the seemingly 
chaotic, ad-hoc way these expressions are currently 
treated. We noted that the phoricity of a discourse 
marker corresponds to a certain prosodic pattern. Al- 
though whether such a correspondence is universal or 
not remains to be seen, it would be interesting to pur- 
sue this in comparison with other languages other than 
English and Japanese. 
Our taxonomy would in turn suggest he possibility 
of developing a system of linear precedence relations 
among discourse markers and discourse units, with rules 
governing when and where a discourse marker may oc- 
cur in an utterance. Such a 'syntax' of discourse mark- 
ers naturally has an important bearing on constructing 
a grammar of natural, spoken discourse \[Nakano et al, 
1994\]. 
On the other hand, the presumed categoricity does 
not seem to be so fine-grained as to provide clear-cut 
phonological telltales distinguishing among the "func- 
tional meanings" of a member of one category: the 
different functional meanings of hat, for example, does 
not seem to be disambiguated solely by the differences 
in pitch patterns. Such finer-grained istinctions could 
only be made with a help of context; one has to take into 
account what type of expression or speech act precedes 
the discourse marker, and in what position of a phrase 
the marker occurs \[Walker and Whittaker, 1990\]. 
Acknowledgments  
The authors would like to thank Dr. Ken'ichiro Ishii, 
the director of Information Science Laboratory, NTT 
Basic Research Labs, and the other members of Dia- 
logue Understanding Group for their support. 
Re ferences  
\[Dohsaka and Shimazu, 1996\] Kohji Dohsaka and 
Akira Shimazu. A computational model of incremen- 
tal utterance production in task-oriented ialogues. 
In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics, 1996. 
\[Hirschberg and Litman, 1987\] Julia Hirschberg and 
Diane Litman. Now let's talk about now: identi- 
fying cue phrases intonationally. In the Proceedings 
of the $hth Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 163-171, 1987. 
\[Kawamori et at., 1994\] Masahito Kawamori, Akira 
Shimazu, and Kiyoshi Kogure. Roles of interjectory 
responses in spoken discourse. In the Proceedings 
of the 3rd International Conference on Spoken Lan- 
guage Processing, 1994. 
\[Kawamori et al, 1996\] Masahito Kawamori, Akira 
Shimazu, and Takeshi Kawabata. A phonological 
study on Japanese discourse markers. In the Pro- 
ceedings of the l l th Pacific Asia Conference on Lan- 
guage, Information and Computation, 1996. 
\[Kawamori, 1991\] Masahito Kawamori. Japanese sen- 
tence final particles and episternic modality. The 
Technical Report of the Institute of Electronics, In- 
formation and Communication Engineers NLC 91- 
12,-, pages 41-48, 1991. 
\[Kobayashi et al, 1993\] S. Kobayashi, M. Yamamoto, 
and S. Nakagawa. Accoustic characteristics oncern- 
ing the occurrences of interjections, repairs etc. The 
Technical Report of the Institute of Electronics, In- 
formation and Communication Engineers SLP 93-1- 
2, pages 7-10, 1993. 
\[Martin, 1975\] Samuel Martin. A Reference Grammar 
of Japanese. Yale University Press, New Haven, 1975. 
\[Nakano et al, 1994\] Mikio Nakano, Akira Shimazu, 
and Kiyoshi Kogure. A grammar and a parser for 
spontaeous speech. In Proceedings of the 15th Inter- 
national Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
1994. 
\[Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg, 1990\] Janet Pierre- 
humbert and Julia Hirschberg. The meaning of into- 
national contours in the interpretation of discourse. 
\[n Philip R. Cohen, Jerry Morgan, and Martha E. 
Pollack, editors, Intentions in Communication, pages 
271-311. MIT Press, 1990. 
=Pollack el al., 1982\] Martha Pollack, Julia Hirschberg, 
and Bonny Webber. User participation i  the reason- 
ing process of expert systems. In the Proceedings of 
the American Association for Artificial Intelligence, 
1982. 
\[Schiffrin, 1987\] Deborah Schiffrin. Discourse Markers. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
\[Takagi et al, 1993\] K. Takagi, N. Houra, and S. Ita- 
hashi. Characteristics of utterance units in relation 
to the topic flow of spoken dialog. The Technical Re- 
port of the Institute of Electronics, Information and 
Communication Engineers SLP 93-1-3, 1993. 
\[Takubo, 1994\] Yukinori Takubo. Towards a perfor- 
mance model of language. TR SLIP, pages 15-22, 
1994. 
\[Walker and Whittaker, 1990\] Marilyn 
Walker and Steve Whittaker. Mixed initiative in dia- 
logue: An investigation i to discourse segmentation. 
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 1990. 
\[Whittaker and Stenton, 1988\] Steve Whittaker and 
Phil Stenton. Cues and control in expert client dia- 
logues. In the Proceedings of the e6th Annual Meet- 
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pages 123-130, 1988. 
99 
