Automatic Disambiguation of Discourse Particles 
Kerstin Fischer and Hans Brandt-Pook 
Graduate Program Task-oriented Communication 
University of Bielefeld, Germany 
Postfach 100131, D-33501 Bielefeld 
fischer@nats.informatik.uni-hamburg.de 
hbrandt@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de 
Abstract 
In spite of their important quantitative role, 
discourse particles have so far been ne- 
glected in automatic speech processing for 
two reasons: Firstly it is not clear what 
they may contribute to the aims of auto- 
matic speech processing, and secondly their 
functions seem to vary so much that it 
seems difficult to identify the information 
relevant o such aims. The approach pre- 
sented here therefore attempts to provide au- 
tomatic means to distinguishing the different 
readings of discourse particles and to filter- 
ing out the information which can be use- 
ful for speech understanding systems, em- 
ploying positional information and their role 
within a dialogue model of the respective do- 
main, two types of information which are es- 
pecially easy to obtain. First results indicate 
that discourse particles can indeed be auto- 
matically disambiguated on the basis of the 
model proposed. 
1 Introduction 
Discourse particles, as for instance Ger- 
man ja, nein, ach, oh, and ~hrn, and En- 
glish well, yes, oh, ah, and uhm (Schiffrin, 
1987), are extremely frequent phenomena 
of spontaneous spoken language dialogues. 
For instance, in informal German human- 
to-human communication, their frequency 
ranges between 8.8% and 9.8% (Fischer and 
Johanntokrax, 1995). In human-computer 
interaction, this prominent quantitative role 
decreases; however, they may still constitute 
6.6% of the 150 most frequent words (Fis- 
cher and Johanntokrax, 1995). In spite of 
their important quantitative role, discourse 
particles have so far been neglected in au- 
tomatic speech processing; if they are iden- 
tified at all, then only in order to eliminate 
them (O'Shaugnessy, 1993). Reasons may 
be firstly that it is not clear what they could 
contribute to the aims of automatic speech 
processing, and secondly that they may ful- 
fill so many different functions that it seems 
difficult to identify the information relevant 
to such aims. 
In this study, it will firstly be investigated 
what these discourse particles contribute to 
natural human-to-human conversation with 
the aim to determine which of their functions 
can be useful for automatic speech process- 
ing. In order to make use of the information 
they provide: however, they need to be dis- 
ambiguated. Two different strategies will be 
employed to disambiguate them automati- 
cally: On the one hand their position with 
respect o the turn and utterance in which 
they occur will be investigated in order to 
see how much it contributes to the interpre- 
tation of a discourse particle occurrence, on 
the other their role in the dialogue structure, 
especially regarding a dialogue model, will 
be analyzed. These two types of informa- 
tion, position and dialogue acts, are particu- 
larly easy to obtain during automatic speech 
processing. The aim of this investigation is 
thus to determine 
? what discourse particles contribute to 
hun~an-to-human dialogues; 
? what they may contribute to automatic 
speech processing; 
? in how far their surface properties, in 
particular their position regarding the 
107 
turn and the utterance, influence their 
functions; 
what the dialogue structure may con- 
tribute to their automatic disambigua- 
tion; 
how these aspects interact and how this 
interaction can be modelled in an actual 
automatic speech processing system. 
It will be shown that the two types of in- 
formation involved suffice to disambiguate 
a considerable portion of discourse particle 
occurrences and that there is consequently 
no reason to eliminate them from automatic 
speech processing. Finally, a model for an 
implementation i a semantic network for 
the automatic disambiguation of discourse 
particles will be proposed. 
2 The Functions of Discourse 
Particles 
The following examples from a corpus 
recorded in the appointment scheduling do- 
main (Verbmobil Database, TP 13) show sev- 
eral different functions the English discourse 
particle yeah may fulfill: 
(1) 13BAR: what about the 18th of De- 
cember? 
14RIC: <P> yeah, yeah, that work. 
(2) 1UMI: yeah, we've got to get together 
and discuss <P> Stufe A fiir die Stu- 
dienordnung, a 
(3) 124ENG: so that won't work either. 
125UMI: yeah, that's not good. 
(4) 3RIC: I'm Ric M. and I am <P> 
what do I do? (whispering) software 
? yeah, I'm working for a software 
account 2
1The dialogue between ative speakers ofEnglish 
was recorded at a German University. 
Sin these dialogues, recorded for scenario design, 
speakers are assigned a new identity. 
In example (1), yeah is a positive answer to 
a proposal. In (2), it functions as a signal by 
means of which the speaker introduces a new 
topic, here it opens up the conversation, con- 
stituting the first utterance in the dialogue; 
in example (3), it serves to give feedback to 
the hearer, indicating perception and under- 
standing and also basic agreement with the 
partner (Schegloff, 1982). Finally, in exam- 
ple (4), yeah occurs after a speech manage- 
ment problem, that is, after the speaker does 
not know how to continue. 
Other discourse particles may fulfill simi- 
lar functions: in example (5), the discourse 
particle mmm functions as a signal of per- 
ception and understanding, and so does the 
first well in example (6) while it furthermore 
relates the current utterance to the previ- 
ous. The second instance of well in this ex- 
ample marks a thematic break, concluding 
the topic concerning the partner's cold and 
returning to the previous attempt o find a 
possible date for a meeting. This discourse 
structuring function can also be found for 
the hesitation marker uh in example (7). 
16UMI: yeah, just one of the students 
about San Soto anyway. 
17ENG: mram 
(6) 6UMI: I've got <P> 
7ENG: well, you've got a very heavy 
cold, but well <P> wh/ wh/why is 
this week out of the question? 
(7) l l4UMI: yeah, this weekend's k k k 
completely chaotic, uh. let's see. 
Thus, the functions discourse particles 
may fulfill are as follows: they mark 
thematic breaks, thus making the macro- 
structural organisation of the dialogue trans- 
parent for the hearer; they signal the relat- 
edness of the current utterance to the previ- 
ous, they indicate whether the information 
transfer is successful, and whether the chan- 
nel is still available. Finally they support he 
formulation process in case there are speech 
management problems. Thus, they may ful- 
fill a large but not an unlimited number of 
functions. 
108 
Furthermore, several of these functions 
have been found to co-occur in stable feature 
bundles. For instance, in example (6), the 
first instance of well displays perception and 
understanding of what the partner has said 
and furthermore indicates that the speaker 
is going to add something to the same topic. 
The same information is conveyed by yeah in 
example (3). This implies that there are not 
only co-occurrence relations between differ- 
ent functional features but also that a gen- 
eral inventory of pragmatic interpretation 
of discourse particles can be proposed, such 
that the same pragmatic function can be ful- 
filled by different discourse particles. 
The linguistic model presented here conse- 
quently assumes that each discourse particle 
can be assigned a context-specific nterpre- 
tation (StenstrSm, !994) which belongs to a 
limited inventory and which can be seen as a 
bundle of functional features which may be 
fulfilled by several different discourse parti- 
cles. Additional information is carried by 
the lexemes themselves (Fischer, 1996), for 
instance, in the case of yes agreement, and 
rejection in the case of no. 
The descriptive inventory, which was ar- 
rived at by means of several hypothesis-test- 
cycles on the basis of four large corpora 
(Fischer andJohanntokrax, 1995; Schmitz 
and Fischer, 1995), consists of the following 
items: 
? take-up: signals perception and under- 
standing regarding the previous utter-  
ance and takes up the current opic; 
? backchannel:  gives feedback and sup- 
ports the other's turn; 
? f rame: marks a break in the thematic 
structure; 
? repair  marker:  signals problems in the 
formulation process; 
? answer: signals agreement on, or rejec- 
tion of, a proposition; 
? check: signals the hearer that the 
speaker would like to get positive feed- 
back; 
? modal :  refers to the common ground or  
the information 'on hand;' establishes a 
relation of coherence between the utter- 
ance and a pragmatic pretext. 
In how far can these functions now be used 
for automatic speech processing? On the one 
hand, the most trivial point is the ambigu- 
ity of certain discourse particles concerning 
propositional and other information, for ex- 
ample German ja, nein, doch or nicht, or En- 
glish yes or no. Information on this ambigu- 
ity is essential for automatic speech process- 
ing systems ince if it is not resolved, con- 
tradictory or just wrong information will be 
inferred. Consider the following proposal for 
an appointment in example (8). 
(8) geht es nicht urn 13 Uhr.? 
(isn't it possible at 1 p.m.?) 
In this example the discourse particle 
nicht does not contribute to the proposi- 
tional information; however, it does so in the 
following example: 
(9) es geht nicht urn I3 Uhr. 
(it isn't possible at 1 p.m..) 
The examples demonstrate the need for 
the disambiguation of discourse particle oc- 
currences ince the recognition of keywords 
such as nicht would lead to wrong conclu- 
sions regarding the first example; however, 
disregarding it would obscure the proposi- 
tion in the second example. 
On the other hand, if the different func- 
tions of discourse particles can be automati- 
cally determined, they can also support fur- 
ther semantic and pragmatic analyses con- 
cerning the information structure and the 
macro-structural organisation of a dialogue, 
segmentation, and the recognition of repair 
sequences in the same way as they are taken 
as signals by human speech processors. Au- 
tomatic disambiguation of discourse parti- 
cles is therefore essential to their further 
employment in automatic speech processing 
systems. 
109 
3 Automat ic  Disambiguat ion 
of Discourse Particles 
To account for the multifunctionality of dis- 
course particles, two strategies are com- 
bined: the analysis of the syntactic position 
of a discourse particle and the role of the 
pragmatic environment the discourse parti- 
cle occurs in. 
3.1 The  Inf luence of the Posi t ion in 
Turn  and Ut terance  
Positions in turn and utterance seem to be 
good candidates for determining the inter- 
pretation of German discourse particles; for 
instance, if ja occurs utterance finally, it is 
likely to be used in a checking function, for 
example: 
(10) elf Vhr sagten Sie, ja? (FRS001) 
(you said l 1 a.m., right?) 
Thus, different functions can be assigned 
to certain contextual positions of ja; as we 
have seen, turn-final ja usually functions to 
elicit feedback from the hearer; utterance- 
medial ja, if the utterance is not inter- 
rupted and a new utterance is begun, serves 
as a modal particle, otherwise as a repair 
marker. The largest group is constituted by 
turn- and utterance-initial discourse parti- 
cles; these serve either to signal perception 
and understanding and that one is going to 
add something to the same subject matter, 
or as answer signals. The latter may however 
also occur as a complete turn or turn-finally, 
so that other types of information are nec- 
essary to identity' the function of ja as an 
answer signal carrying propositional content 
than the position in turn and utterance only: 
Nevertheless, the syntactic position in which 
a discourse particle occurs provides a valu- 
able source for the automatic disambigua- 
tion of discourse particles, as will be shown 
by means of the following experiments. 
First of all, 150 examples of the especially 
multifunctional German discourse particle ja 
were analyzed regarding their surface and 
pragmatic properties. Secondly, to each dis- 
course particle a context-specific interpreta- 
tion from the inventory proposed in the pre- 
vious section could be assiglJed. By means 
of an artificial neural network classificator 
(Scheler and Fischer, 1997), it was deter- 
mined whether the eight classes described in 
the previous section can be assigned auto- 
matically on the basis of a selection of struc- 
tural and pragmatic features. In particular, 
training a feedforward-backpropagation net- 
work simulated by SNNS p.d. software with 
ca. 100 examples of German ja, and test- 
ing on ca. 50 new examples can show firstly 
whether the classification proposed is suffi- 
ciently contrastive and thus learnable. Fur- 
thermore it is determined of which influence 
on the correct classification of the new ex- 
arnples particular properties are such as the 
syntactic position or the respective intona- 
tion contour. 
Good results in the experiments employ- 
ing the whole feature set indicate that the 
classes are learnable and that the classifica- 
tion can be replicated by an automatic las- 
sifter (Scheler and Fischer, 1997). Concern- 
ing the role of particular surface features, 
ca. 55% (standard deviation 4.38) of the 
context-specific interpretations can be deter- 
mined only on the basis of surface properties 
such as syntactic position, combination with 
other discourse particles, intonation contour, 
or tim left and right context. The position 
in turn and utterance alone produces simi- 
lar results. On the basis of the intonation 
contours alone, ca. fifty percent can be as- 
signed correctly (however, the standard de- 
viation here is quite high). Position and 
prosody together each 57.7% (standard e- 
viation 4.31). The other surface properties 
therefore only provide redundant informa- 
tion compared to these two types, adding 
them for training and testing the network 
does not increase the assignment rate. So 
it seems promising to regard aspects of the 
surface realization as a valuable source for 
the automatic disambiguation of the func- 
tions of discourse particles. This informa- 
tion is exploited in the implementation of
a speech processing system in the appoint- 
ment scheduling domain described in section 
4 especially regarding the position with re- 
spect to the utterance since it is the informa- 
tion most easily to obtain for an automatic 
ii0 
= O 
S_OPENING 
S_REJECT O 
U_PROPOSAL 
= O 
O U_PRECISE 
= 0 
'~"'"-.....,...~. S_FINAL_CONFIRM l/ 
0 
U_REJECT 
Figure 1: Dialogue model 
U_CONFIRM 
= 0 ----b- 0 
S CLOSING 
speech processing system. 
The first type of information which the au- 
tomatic speech processing system is going to 
rely on for the automatic disambiguation f 
discourse particles is thus the prototypical 
syntactic position for each discourse func- 
tion. 
3.2 The Role of a Dialogue Model  
As a second major source of information for 
the automatic disambiguation of discourse 
particles, a significant correlation between 
certain dialogue acts, domain-specific speech 
acts (Schmitz and Quantz, 1995), and cer- 
tain discourse functions, the context-specific 
readings of discourse particles, was deter- 
mined. For instance, in the informal task- 
oriented human-to-human dialogues, 40.43% 
(standard deviation 7.9) of the discourse 
functions of ja could be assigned correctly 
by the artificial neural network classificator 
only on the basis of the information which 
the preceding and which the following dia- 
logue act was, although in this corpus the 
number of dialogue acts assigned is quite 
high, and the relationship between them is 
highly variable. Consequently, the reduction 
of complexity caused by the specialization on 
one domain in task-oriented settings can be 
exploited here by postulating a limited in- 
ventory of speech acts occurring in the cor- 
pus under consideration. A dialogue model 
which represents the possible relations be- 
tween dialogue acts in a flow chart can thus 
make predictions about the following dia- 
logue act and also about a probable function 
of the respective discourse particle. Thus, in- 
formation for each discourse particle about 
its occurrence in certain dialogue acts may 
support its automatic disambiguation. In 
human-computer interaction, for example, 
this sequential relationship between dialogue 
acts may be even more straightforward, and 
the domain may be furher restricted. 
For analyses of the appointment schedul- 
ing domain, a small corpus of 30 dialogues 
with altogether 145 turns was gathered in a 
hun~an-to-machine sc nario to arrive at sta- 
tistical correlations between functional in- 
formation concerning discourse particles and 
tile dialogue acts in which they occur. On 
the basis of these instances of spoken in- 
teraction, a dialogue model was constituted 
(see Fig. 1). Tile descriptive categories were 
based on those proposed for tile Verbmo- 
bil corpus (Alexandersson et al, 1997). By 
means of these dialogue acts, it can be partly 
determined what the fun,tion of a respective 
discourse particle may be in the particular 
setting; for instance, it is much more likely 
that ja is an answer particle if it occurs in 
an utterance after the system has asked for 
the confirmation of a date (as in example 
11) rather than an uptaking signal when it 
is used at the beginning of a dialogue be- 
tween system S and user U (as in example 
111 
12). 
(il) S: Bitte bestgtigen Sie diesen Ter- 
rain. 
(Please confirm this appointment.) 
U: ja, dieser Termin ist richtig. 
(10_2_02) 
(yes, this is the right date.) 
(12) U: ja, guten Tag, ich h?tte gern 
einen Termin. (6_1_00) 
(yes, hello, I'd like to schedule an ap- 
pointment.) 
In the linguistic model, information on the 
correlation between dialogue acts and cer- 
tain functions of discourse particles as well 
as syntactic information are combined. The 
following section describes the implementa- 
tion of these types of information. 
4 Implementat ion 
The model described above was imple- 
mented and tested in a system for appoint- 
ment scheduling (Brandt-Pook et al, 1996). 
For the representation of linguistic knowl- 
edge, this system uses the semantic net- 
work language ERNEST (I(ummert et al, 
1993). The linguistic knowledge of this sys- 
tem is modelled hierarchically on five levels 
of abstraction: The word hypothesis level es- 
tablishes the interface to the speech recog- 
nition system; the syntactic, semantic and 
the pragmatic level declaratively represent 
the interaction of lexical and other knowl- 
edge; and the dialogue level manages dia- 
logue strategy and dialogue memory. The 
concepts at the different levels are connected 
by means of abstraction links. Within a level, 
has-part and is-a links are defined. 
Each occurrence of a discourse particle 
is interpreted bottom-up. Thus, a word- 
hypothesis is created so as to identify the 
relevant word form; connected to this is a 
concept PARTICLE, for which the utterance 
position for the respective discourse parti- 
cle is identified. On the dialogue level the 
interpretation of a discourse particle occur- 
rence and its functional role is completed. 
The attribute att_disc_particle realizes rules 
that combine the different ypes of informa- 
tion which participate in the model for the 
pragmatic interpretation of discourse parti- 
cles. Thus, on the one hand, the position 
in turn and utterance is treated as a condi- 
tion on the interpretation of a discourse par- 
ticle, on the other, due to the fact that the 
previous system-output influences the next 
user utterance, the dialogue act of the fol- 
lowing utterance and consequently the func- 
tion of a respective discourse particle can be 
predicted. For instance, a system request 
for an explicit confirmation predicts an an- 
swer signal by the user, as implemented in
the rule concerning the word form ja (see 
Fig. 2). With this information, an utterance 
IF (word == ja)  
IF (position == INITIAL) 
IF (last_sys-output==S..P_C0NFIl:tM I 
last~ys-output==S_F_C0NFIRM ) 
discourse.function := ANSWEI:t 
ELSE 
discourse_function := TAKE-UP 
ELSE IF  (position == MEDIAL) 
discourse_function := MODAL 
ELSE /* position == FINAL */ 
discourseZunction := CHECK 
Figure 2: Rule concerning the word form ja 
of ja can be correctly classified as either an 
answer signal or as a discourse particle with 
certain pragmatic functions. 
5 Results and Conclusion 
To determine in how far the system rely- 
ing only on the two types of information 
described, syntactic position and the previ- 
ous dialogue act, can automatically disam- 
biguate occurrences of discourse particles, a 
test was designed on the basis of natural 
authentic dialogues. These, however, were 
typed into the system in order to be able to 
analyze the contribution of the implementa- 
tion most clearly; the results are therefore 
not obscured from errors by the speech rec- 
ognizer. 
Good results were achieved regarding the 
112 
test-sentences with altogether 75 discourse 
particles. In comparison with a double- 
checked hand-tagged version, 83% were au- 
tomatically assigned the correct discourse 
function. These results show that automatic 
speech processing systems can indeed disam- 
biguate discourse particle occurrences on the 
basis of extremely reduced linguistic knowl- 
edge. Consequently it is not the case that 
automatic speech processing systems can- 
not identify the relevant information. Thus, 
discourse particles do not constitute such a 
chaotic domain after all; already very sim- 
ple and easily obtainable linguistic informa- 
tion on their occurrences in dialogues can 
lead to their automatic lassification. A sys- 
tem which could make use of prosody, for 
instance, may get even better results. This 
opens up the way to employing discourse 
particles in automatic speech processing sys- 
tems, for instance, as keywords regarding 
propositional information, to infer dialogue 
structure, or in order to control the informa- 
tion flow and to support speech management 
tasks, which all can support the aims of au- 
tomatic speech processing systems. 
References 
Jan Alexandersson, Bianka Buschbeck-Wolf, 
Tsutomu Fujinami, Elisabeth Maier, Nor- 
bert Reithinger, Birte Schmitz, and 
Melanie Siegel. 1997. Dialogue acts in 
verbmobil-2. Report 204, ?~rbmobil. 
Hans Brandt-Pook, Gernot A. rink, Bernd 
Hildebrandt, Franz Kummert, and Ger- 
hard Sagerer. 1996. A Robust Dialogue 
System for Making an Appointment. In 
ICSLP96: Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Spo- 
ken Language Processing, volume 2, pages 
693-696, Philadelphia. 
Kerstin Fischer and Michaela Johanntokrax. 
1995. Ein linguistisches Merkmalsmodell 
fur die Lexikalisierung von diskurssteuern- 
den Einheiten. Report 18, SFB 360 "Si- 
tuierte k/instliche Kommunikatoren'. Uni- 
versity of Bielefeld. 
Kerstin Fischer. 1996. A construction-based 
approach to the lexicalization of inter- 
jections. In M. Gellerstam, J. J?rborg, 
S. Mahngren, K. NSren, L. RogstrSm, and 
C. Rojder Papmehl, editors, Euralez '96: 
PROCEEDINGS, pages 85-91. University 
of Gothenburg. 
Franz Kummert, Heinrich Niemann, Rein- 
hard Prechtel, and Gerhard Sagerer. 1993. 
Control and Explanation in a Signal Un- 
derstanding Environment. Signal Pro- 
cessing, special issue on 'Intelligent Sys- 
tems for Signal and Image Understand- 
ing ', 32:111-145. 
Douglas O'Shaugnessy. 1993. Locating dis- 
fluencies in spontaneous peech: An 
acoustic analysis. In Proceedings of the 
3rd European Coriference on Speech Com- 
munication and Fechnology, pages 2187- 
2190. 
Emanuel A. Schegloff. 1982. Discourse as " 
an interactional chievement: Some uses 
of 'uh huh' and other things that come 
between sentences. In Deborah Tannen, 
editor, .4nalysing Discourse. Text and 
Talk. Washington: Georgetown University 
Press. 
Gabriele Scheler and Kerstin Fischer. 1997. 
The many functions of discourse parti- 
cles: A computational model of pragmatic 
interpretation. In Proceedings of Cogsci 
1997. 
Deborah Schiffrin. 1987. Discourse markers. 
Number 5 in Studies in Interactional Soci- 
olinguistics. Cambridge University Press. 
Birte Schmitz and Kerstin Fischer. 1995. 
Pragmatisches Bescheibungsinventar f/Jr 
Diskurspartikeln und Routineformeln 
anhand der Demonstratorwortliste. 
Memo 75, Verbmobil. 
Birte Schmitz and ,Joachim J. Quantz. 1995. 
Dialogue acts in automatic dialogue pro- 
cessing. In Proceedings of the Sixth Con- 
ference on Theoretical and Methodological 
Issues in Machine Translation, TMI-95, 
Leuven, pages 33-47. 
Anna-Brita Stenstr6m. 1994. An Intro- 
duction to Spoken Interaction. Learn- 
ing about Language. London/ New York: 
Longman. 
113 
