The t reatment  of noun phrase queries in a natura l  language 
database  access sys tem 
Alexandra  K le in  and Johannes  Mat iasek  and Hara ld  T ros t  
Austr ian Research Institute for Artificial Intell igence 
Schottengasse 3 
1010 Vienna 
Austr ia 
{alexandra, john ,harald}~ai. univie, ac. at 
Abst ract  
In this paper, we are going to describe some 
aspects of the TAMIC-P system for German, 
which interprets natural-language queries to 
databases in the social insurance domain. These 
natural anguage queries are complex NPs, con- 
sisting of clusters of NPs and PPs. The parser 
uses information about co-occurence and domi- 
nation of linguistic elements as well as concept 
hierarchies in the domain to construct a parse 
tree and, subsequently, a derivation in quasi- 
logical form. This derivation can be translated 
into a database access query. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Systems which map natural language query 
phrases onto database access query statements, 
(Trost et al, 1987), (Androutsopoulos et al, 
1995), provide a natural communication envi- 
ronment. Yet this means that they must be able 
to handle vagueness, incompleteness or even un- 
grammaticality as these phenomena tend to be 
associated with language use under specific ex- 
ternal constraints as e.g. in situations con- 
cerned with database access. In this paper, we 
are going to describe the natural anguage un- 
derstanding component of the TAMIC-P 1 sys- 
tem for German, which interprets natural an- 
guage queries addressing the databases of the 
Austrian social insurance institution for farmers 
(Sozialversicherungsanstalt der Bauern, SVB). 
The input queries are parsed and mapped onto 
a representation i quasi-logical form which 
serves as basis for the required database ac- 
cess. Simultaneously, the queries are searched 
for domain-specific cue words which are part 
1Research in this project is funded by the European 
communit.y under contract no. LE-4253. Financial sup- 
port for OFAI is provided by the Austrian Federal Min- 
istry of Science and Transport. 
of a lexical knowledge base (cf. e.g. (Christ, 
1994)) This knowledge base is also accessible 
from the user's query interface. Additionally, 
many legal terms which occur in the queries 
may be linked to the underlying legal regula- 
tions. These regulations are available in hyper- 
text format and allow for browsing via the user 
interface. Domain-specific help files will eventu- 
ally also be integrated in the data to be accessed 
via the user interface. 
An evaluation of the user requirements in this 
specific natural anguage task yielded the result 
that the prospective users of the system, social 
insurance clerks at local information days, feel 
most comfortable if they have the possibility to 
input their queries as noun phrases. For the 
natural anguage query interpretation task, this 
implies that complex and heterogeneous noun 
phrases have to be interpreted adequately. 
In the following sections, we are going to de- 
scribe the general aim of the TAMIC-P system, 
the system scenario, the kind of input the sys- 
tem has to be able to deal with and the parsing 
process. We will then give an outline of how 
some complex queries are treated in parsing, 
and finally, we are going to conclude with obser- 
vations (including their implications for further 
work) derived from the current system setting 
and its application in the process of parsing NP 
queries in the TAMIC-P domain. 
2 The  TAMIC-P  sys tem for  German 
in the  Aust r ian  scenar io  
The TAMIC-P system is realized in collabora- 
tion with Italian and German 2project partners. 
2DFKI GmbH, Saarbr/icken, Germany, has con- 
tributed to the German language module and the asso- 
ciated knowledge sources. The authors would therefore 
like to thank Stephan Busemarm for his work in this area, 
particularly the development of the grammar. 
39 
It consists of two language components; one for 
Italian in the Italian scenario and one for Ger- 
man in the Austrian scenario. While the inter- 
face structure (developed by the Italian part- 
ner) and the configuration of the main modules 
are mostly identical in the two scenarios and 
while both applications aim at interpreting NP 
queries, the two natural language components 
represent two distinct approaches to the query 
interpretation task. In this paper, we will focus 
on the query interpretation module as well as 
the required knowledge sources for dealing with 
German NPs. 
The scenario- and language-specific part of 
the system consists mainly of the actual pars- 
ing component, a lexical knowledge base (LKB) 
representing the entities denoted in the queries 
and their relations to each other, the conceptual 
data model (CDM) specifying which entities can 
be found in the various databases, and the logi- 
cal data model (LDM) which approximates the 
actual data as they occur in the domain. 
I QUERY I 
QUERY 
INTERPRETATION 
PERSONAL 
RECORD MODE 
LEGAL 
NORMS MODE 
LEXICAL  
STRUCTURE 
MODE 
figl: Architecture of the 
interpretat ion module for German 
queries in the Austr ian scenario 
The parsing component and the knowledge 
sources are connected closely. In order to con- 
struct a quasi-logical-form expression for a nat- 
ural language query encountered as system in- 
put, the parsing component has to consult the 
relations between the denoted entities as they 
are represented in the database. These relations 
are modelled in the CDM, which is a unified 
and simplified version of the logical data model 
represented in the database. Yet it is not suf- 
ficient to construct he QLF representation: as
cue words have to be identified in the queries 
in order to present legal norms and domain- 
specific lexica\] relations, these contexts have to 
be built and embedded in the framework of le- 
gal regulations and concept structures. Conse- 
quently, there are three output modes (personal 
information, legal texts, legal lexicon) which are 
presented on the interface as a card-index dis- 
play. A fourth output mode (domain-specific 
help files) will eventually be added to the sys- 
tem. 
3 The  TAMIC-P  scenar io  
Queries which have to be interpreted in the 
TAMIC-P domain concern all areas of social se- 
curity, i.e. pension, health and accident insur- 
ance. In order to provide the required informa- 
tion, several databases have to be consulted. As 
social insurance mployees in advisory dialogues 
have to work under extreme cognitive pressure 
due to limited time and other situational con- 
straints, it is the aim of the TAMIC-P project o 
simplify this advisory process by providing one 
interface for the various different tasks which 
have to be performed: 
? consult citizen's insurance data in several 
databases 
? consult the relevant laws arid regulations 
? consult a legal glossary for related terms 
and concepts 
In TAMIC-P, these tasks are based on the in- 
terpretation of natural anguage queries and the 
interaction with the interface. For the user, this 
verbal and graphical interaction faciliates ob- 
taining the requested results from the databases 
as well as the norms and the compilation of le- 
gal terms. At the same time, clients using the 
system have to rely on great robustness in the 
query interpretation task so that queries do not 
result in the distribution of false, inadequate or 
incomplete information. 
4 The  corpus  
As it has already been mentioned, queries 
entered into TAMIC-P by SVB clerks concern 
40 
personal data as well as legal affairs. A fairly 
typical query would be for instance 
Ersatzzeiten wegen Kindererziehung 
'Exemption times because of child raising' 
At the present state of the system, this 
query has three dimensions with regard to its 
interpretation: First, it concerns the personal 
insurance records stored for a specific persion 
(this person is determined by the context) who 
may or may not have acquired the requested 
type of insurance months. Second, it refers to 
a special official status of insurance months 
which is defined in legal texts describing the 
benefits which can be derived from different 
kinds of insurance times. Third, the query and 
its underlying concepts have to be compared 
to related queries and concepts: I.e. in a 
wordnet-type structure, Ersatzzeiten ('exemp- 
tion times') is in this specific use synonymous 
to Ersat=monate ('exemption months') and 
belongs to the category of Versicherungszeiten 
('insurance times'). Furthermore, there are 
several different types of specific 'exemption 
times because of child raising' (e.g. raising 
adopted children, grandchildren etc.) which 
have to be considered in an evaluation of the 
insurance records, particularly if a citizen 
applies for retirement pension. 
An evaluation of user queries has shown 
that the SVB clerks were reluctant to form 
full, grammatically elaborate sentences; in- 
stead, they preferred to rely on noun phrases 
denoting the requested concepts from the social 
insurance domain. Regarding the example, this 
does not come as a surprise as - apart from the 
additional cognitive effort which is required in 
using a complete sentence - using an NP seems 
to be a natural way of including the three di- 
mensions of the specific personal information 
from the insurance records, the legal norms, and 
the lexical knowledge base in the noun phrase 
quoted above. In contrast, three complete sen- 
tences have to be formed to refer to the same 
dimensions if noun phrases are avoided. The 
corresponding English phrases for the German 
full examples are: 
? Which exemption times because of child 
raising are stored for Mrs/Mr x? 
? What are the legal regulations concerning 
exemption times because of child raising? 
? What are the relevant lezical properties as- 
sociated with exemption times because of 
child raising? 
Note that the second and the third example 
use some kind of metalanguage to link 'exemp- 
tion times because of child raising' to the re- 
quired dimension. In contrast o this, the noun 
phrase 'exemption times because of child rais- 
ing' needs no metalanguage und points ellipti- 
cally to all three dimensions. Therefore, if only 
noun phrases are used, their inherent vagueness 
and incompleteness at least provide means to 
consult all the relavant information sources i- 
multaneously. 
For the NP analysis, this implies that much 
effort has to be invested in modelling the 
entities and relations denoted by the linguisti c
expressions, and certainly also the mapping 
between the linguistic and the conceptual 
levels. Tighly packed linguistic structures 
refer to complex conceptual structures. The 
dependencies in the conceptual model are 
mirrored in the linguistic expressions. As we 
are dealing with noun phrase queries, it is not 
possible to regard verbs as assigning the key 
structural dependencies. Yet it can be said that 
certain conceptually pivotal nouns 'subcatego- 
rize' (to use this term loosely for illustration 
purposes) for specific linguistic objects which 
are determined by the underlying conceptual 
data model as well as certain conventions of 
use. These 'subcategorization relations' are 
often confirmed by prepositions with weak 
semantics: 
Ersatzzeiten wegen Kindererziehung 
'Exemption times because of  child raising.' 
The function of the preposition is to indi- 
cate the relation. In German, these types of 
noun phrase are often turned into a compound 
with the meaning remaining unchanged: 
Kinde rerziehu ngse rsa tzzeite n
'child raising exemption times' 
These remarks already describe the NP 
typology encountered in queries: complex NP 
41 
clusters, NP-PP clusters (with faded preposi- 
tional semantics) and complex compounds. Of 
course, any combinations of the three types 
may also occur. 
5 Pars ing  IWP quer ies  
5.1 Compos i t iona l i ty  and 
non-compos i t iona l i ty  
Generally, the parsing process in the TAMIC- 
P query interpretation component for the Aus- 
trian scenario relies strongly on the hypothesis 
that the semantics of a phrase (represented for 
example in quasi-logical form) can be derived 
by composition of the QLFs of the parts the 
phrase is composed of. This implies that linguis- 
tic paraphrases which denote the same object or 
set of objects have to eventually end up in iden- 
tical representations. As we are dealing with 
a limited domain, which usually restricts the 
number of options available for interpretation, 
this approach is feasible. "2ht so far, we have no 
possibility of dealing with queries beyond the 
field of social-insurance. The domain also en- 
sues that the conceptual data model, represent- 
ing entities and relations in the actual database, 
often contains imple objects, attributes or at- 
tribute values which are referred to by complex 
query elements on the natural-language level. 
In order to tackle this problem, a filter mecha- 
nism is used which 
? treats all natural anguage utterances in a 
compositional manner, possibly involving 
QLF prediates (originating from the lexi- 
con) that do not denote a CDM object and 
? applies a set of substitutions to the QLF 
resulting from the parse that transform the 
complex description into the simplistic one 
contained in the CDM. 
Since the number of such 'noncompositional' 
objects in the CDM is limited and their 'compo- 
sitional' meaning in terms of a QLF is unique, 
not very many substitution definitions are re- 
quired, and it is not difficult to come up with 
them. At the same time, we are aware of 
the fact that a larger domain might require a 
broader analysis approach (Rayner, 1993). 
5.2 Lexical resources  
As far as lexical resources are concerned, 
the query interpretation module for German 
uses two resources of lexical data: a small 
morphological lexicon, which can be employed 
for morphological nnotation, and a repository 
of semantic and 'subcategorhation' information 
included in the lexical knowledge base (LKB). 
In the LKB, each entry represented as a synset 
in a wordnet-style structure contains slots for 
synonyms, hyponyms and hypernyms, as well 
as a specification of the quasi-logical form as it 
can be derived from the conceptual data model. 
Returning to the example of Ersatzzeit wegen 
Kindererziehtmg ('exemption time because 
of child raising'), from the LKB we obtain 
basically the following structure: 
ERSATZZEIT WEGEN KINDERERZIEHUNG 
CATEGORY: n-filler 
SYNONYMS: Ersatzmonat wegen 
Kindererziehung 
HYPERNYMS: Ersatzzeit, Kindererziehung 
HYPONYMS: 
QUASI-LOGICAL FORM: :ARG (BEITRAG ?X), 
:RESTR (HAS-QUAL ?X <K>), :VAR (?X) 
DESCRIPTION: Typ yon Ersatzzeit, der 
aufgrund yon Kindererziehungszei=en 
angerechnet werden kann 
CATEGORY indicates whether we are deal- 
ing with an object, an attribute or an attribute 
value ('n-filler' indicates that this is an at- 
tribute value). SYNONYMS, HYPERNYMS and 
HYPONYMS each list related lexical concepts 
according to the conceptual data model. The 
QUASI-LOGICAL FORM describes the combi- 
nation of the elements which are needed for 
mapping the query representation onto the 
appropriate database access statement, and 
DESCRIPTION documents a legal explanation of 
the term. 
5.3 The  parser  
The parser uses the information stored in the 
lexical resources for assigning a structure to 
the linguistic expression. This information is 
matched and combined according to grammat- 
ical knowledge (encoded in the grammar and 
the morphological lexicon) as well as domain 
knowledge inherent in the lexical knowledge 
base. From the parser's point of view, it is 
desirable to obtain a single feature structure 
containing both subcategorization information 
42 
and logical form from the lexicon lookup. 
How semantic information has to be combined 
during parsing may not only depend on the 
QLFs in the CDM for the signs to be combined, 
but also on lexical features of the head and the 
syntactic role that is filled by the argument (or 
modifier). In the sentence 
John beats Paul 
for example, the meaning depends cru- 
cially on whether John or Paul fills the 
subject slot. Although these differences occur 
much more frequently with verbs, which are 
rather irrelevant in the TAMIC-P corpus, this 
behaviour can also be observed with nouns. 
Therefore, the following decisions for the en- 
coding of semantic and subcategorization infor- 
mation have been taken: 
1. All substantive categories (nouns, adjec- 
tives, verbs) provide subcategorization in- 
formation for both arguments and modi- 
fiers they may take (modifiers/adjuncts are
viewed as kind of optional arguments). 
2. For each element subcategorized for, syn- 
tactic and semantic information is pro- 
vided, restricting the possible fillers. 
3. In order to explicitly specify the semantic 
relationship of the head and the argument 
in the CDM, 'glue' predicates may be spec- 
ified which bind the quasi-logical forms of 
the head and the argument. 
5.4 Grammar  
Based on the analysis of a small corpus, gram- 
matical rules were derived. At this point, the 
grammar consists of 9 context-free rules. They 
cover to whole range of queries Which have been 
encountered so far. In the first version, com- 
plex prenominal modifiers and relative clauses 
are not implemented, but the corpus suggests 
that these are added benefits rather than ur- 
gent needs. 
For the expression Ersatzzeit wegen Kinder- 
erziehung, we use the following rules: 
GRAMMAR FRAGMENT: 
TOP -> DerP AP N NP PP* 
NP -> NPi Narg 
NPI -> DeZP A* N 
PP -> P NP 
Categories in curly brackets are optional. 
The asterisk represents the Kleene star. Un- 
derlined categories are heads. PP can be a 
temporal modifier. DetP can be a complex 
determiner, corresponding e.g. to between three 
and six , up to five, more than sis, at most 
three, or a simple article like the or a. Lexical 
categories other than determiners include N, 
A, P. 
The derivation with the above grammar 
fragment is as follows: 
Ersatzzeiten wegen Kindererziehung 
'Exemption times because of child raising' 
DERIVATION: 
TOP 
(NP (NPI (N (Ersatzzeiten))), 
PP (P (wegen), NP (NP1 (N 
Kindererziehung)))) 
Lookup in the LKB resulted in a struc- 
ture which has already been described in the 
previous chapter: 
EKSATZZEIT WEGEN KINDEREKZIEHUNG 
CATEGORY: n-filler 
SYNONYMS: Ersatzmona~ wegen 
Kindererziehung 
HYPERNYMS: Ersatzzeit, Kindererziehung 
HYPONYMS: 
QUASI-LOGICAL FORM: :AKG (BEITKAG ?X), 
:RESTK (HAS-QUAL ?X <K>), :VAR (TX) 
DESCKIPTION: Typ yon Ersatzzeit, der 
aufgrund von Kindererziehungszeiten 
angerechnet werden kann 
By combining the grammar rules with the 
information from the LKB as well as the CDM, 
we obtain the following result: 
RESULT OF PARSING (QLF): 
((:ARG (CDM::BEITKAG ?FS18561)) (:VAK 
?FS18561) (:SEL) 
(:KESTK (CDM::BEITRAGQUAL ?FS18561 
43 
?FS18379) (QUAL-VALUE ?FS18379) 
(IN ?FS18379 (43 
E3))(CDM::PERSONIONTEXT ?FS18561 
?FS19601))) 
During the parsing process, it was cor- 
rectly recognized that the query concerns a 
type of BEITRAG ('contribution'), with a certain 
qualification associated with the contribu- 
tion. The codes 43 and E3 indicate which 
categories are assigned to the qualifications of 
the contributions in the database. From the 
parser output, a database access query can 
be constructed, which retrieves the required 
element from the person's insurance records in 
the database. The person is identified in the 
quasi-logical form with the PERSON_KONTEXT 
predicate. 
6 Dea l ing  w i th  complex  quer ies  in 
pars ing  
One example for a more complex query is the 
phrase 
Kindererziehungszeiten der Person mit der 
Versicherungsnummer 1001050610 
'child raising times of the person with social 
insurance number 1001050610' 
This query is asking more generally for 
any insurance times associated with child 
raising. In the Austrian social insurance 
system, citizens are often identified by their 
insurance number, as it is the case in this 
query. The syntactic analysis according to the 
grammar yields the following derivation where 
the social insurance number has been omitted 
for simplification: 
DERIVATION: 
TOP 
(NP (NPi (N Kindererziehungszeiten))), 
(NP (NPI (DetP der), (N Person)), 
(PP (P mit), NP (NPI (DetP der), (N 
Versicherungsnummer ...)))) 
The parser uses co-occurence rules to grasp the 
phenomenon of nominal 'subcategorization'. 
In the example cited above, there is an entry 
which specifies that 'insurance number' tends 
to occur (sometimes connected by yon, 'of') 
with a 'person' who has an insurance number 
and with the actual 'number'. The SUBCAT 
entry looks as follows: 
SUBCAT : 
(def_subcat (cdm::PERSONVSNR ?x ?y) 
((:syn ((car (np pp)) (prep . 
"von")) :sem (cdm::PERSON ?x)) 
(:syn ((cat (cardinal string))) 
(= ?y ?z)))) 
:sem 
These pieces of information are used to 
build up the parse tree: 
TOP 
I 
TOP-DET 
I 
TOP+3PP 
I 
TOP+2PP 
I 
TOPiPP ~ 
QUERYHEAD NP 
I A 
NX DET NP-DET 
I I I 
Kindererzlehungszeiten der NP-ADJ 
A 
NOUN XP 
I I 
Person PP 
mit Versicherungsnummer ... 
fig2: (Simplified) parse tree 
This parse tree is then mapped onto the 
? quasi-logical form: 
RESULT OF PARSING (QLF): 
44 
((:ARG (CDM::BEITRAG ?FS18561)) (:VAR 
7FS18561) (:SEL) 
(:RESTR (CDM::BEITRAGQUAL ?FS18561 
?FSi8379) (QUAL-VALUE ?FSI83Z9) 
(IN ?FS18379 (43 51 87 A8 A9 El E3 E5 
E6 E7 E8 E9)) 
(CDM::PERSON ?FS19601) (CDM::PERSSNVSNR 
?FS19601 ?FS18419) 
(= ?FS18419 "1001050610") 
(CDM::PERSON_KONTEXT 7FS18561 
?FS19601))) 
As Kindererziehungszeiten s a hypernym for 
Ersatzzeiten, there are more different ypes of 
qualification available. 
The compositional aspect of this approach 
also allows the analysis of phrases like 
Kinderer.dehungszeiten der Person mit tier 
Versicherungsnummer 1001050610 nach 1940 
('child raising times of the person with insur- 
ance number 1001050610 after 1940'), Kinder- 
erziehungszeiten der Person mit dem Nachna- 
men Huber nach 1940 ('child raising times of 
person with last name Huber after 1940') etc. 
The analyses for these complex phrases are car- 
ried out in the same manner as for the simpler 
example described above. 
7 Conc lus ion  and  fur ther  work  
So far, this approach seems to work efficiently in 
the limited domain of social insurance informa- 
tion. The integrated treatment of NP 'subcat- 
egorization' allows for an analysis of syntactic 
attachment as well as the interpretation of se- 
mantic structure. The mapping of parse trees 
onto quasi-logical form also combines yntac- 
tic and semantic representation. This way, in- 
formation eeded for constructing the database 
access query does not get lost in the analysis 
process. The analysis also provides information 
which can be used in determining the appropri- 
ate legal norms and the concept hierarchy as it 
is represented in the LKB. 
As it was mentioned above, a problem which 
has not yet been tackled is the treatment of 
queries from outside the domain. As the users 
of the system are insurance clerks, they tend to 
be very cooperative. Therefore we have not en- 
countered uncooperative b haviour in our user 
studies. Within the actual domain, work on 
covering the whole range of user queries is being 
carried out. There are some possible types of ex- 
tremely complex relations for farmers cultivat- 
ing property owned by someone lse. These re- 
lationships have be be modelled in the database 
for the computation of social insurance contri- 
butions and may lead to complex queries. Addi- 
tionally, it would be useful to include an analysis 
of compounds, which - as it is well-known - can 
be rather complex in German. From the evalua- 
tion of these types of possible queries, however, 
we have gained the impression that they can 
be fully analyzed in the compositional pproach 
described in this paper. 
Re ferences  
Ion Androutsopoulos, Graeme D. Ritchie, and 
Peter Thanisch. 1995. Natural Language In- 
terfaces to Databases - An Introduction. Nat- 
ural Language Engineering, i(1):29-81. DAI 
RP-709. 
Oliver Christ. 1994. A Modular and Flexible 
Architecture for an Integrated Corpus Query 
System. In COMPLEX'94. 
Manny Rayner. 1993. Abductive Equivalential 
Translation and its Application to Natural 
Language Database Interfacing. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Stockholm. 
Harald Trost, Ernst Buchberger, Wolfgang 
Heinz, Christian Hoertnagel, and Johannes 
Matiasek. 1987. 'Datenbank-DIALOG' 
a German language interface for relational 
databases. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 
1(2):181-203. 
45 
