/ 
/ 
II 
/ 
/ 
I 
/ 
l 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
Chr i s topher  D .  Mann ing  
University of  Sydney 
cmanning@mail.usyd.edu.au 
Recently there has been a large literature on 
various approaches to learning morphology, and 
the success and cognitive plausibility of different 
approaches (Rumelhart and McClelland (1986), 
MacWhinney and Leinbach (1991) arguing for 
connectionist models, Pinker and Prince (1988), 
Lachter and Bever (1988), Marcus et al (1992) 
arguing against connectionist models, Ling and 
Marinov (1993), Ling (1994) using ID3/C4.5 de- 
cision trees, and Mooney and Califf (1995, 1996) 
using inductive logic programming/decision lists, 
among others). However - except for a couple of 
forays into German - this literature has been ex- 
clusively concerned with the learning of the En- 
glish past tense. This has not worried some. Ling 
is happy to describe it as "a landmark task". But 
while the English past tense has some interesting 
features in its combination of regular ules with 
semi-productive strong verb patterns, it is in many 
other respects a very trivial morphological system 
- reflecting the generally vestigal nature of inflec- 
tional morphology within modem English. 
In this paper, I briefly discuss ome experiments 
on learning morphological forms in languages with 
much richer morphological paradigms. Such lan- 
guages are common throughout much of the globe 
(from Latin and Greek to Inuit and Cashinahua 
or Anmajere and Kayardild - to finish with some 
Australian examples). Attempting to learn mor- 
phology in languages with rich morphology raises 
quite different problems from those discussed in 
the work above, issues discussed - if rather naively 
and unsatisfactorily from a computational view- 
point - in earlier work such as Pinker (1984), 
MacWhinney (1978) and Peters (1983). Foremost 
among these is the segmentation problem of how 
one cuts the complex morphological forms into bits 
with meanings identified. Note that I assume here 
that the child has already figured out the mean- 
ings of words. This is a big assumption, but it is 
reasonable for a model to focus on one aspect of 
the learning problem - and at any rate the learn- 
ing task is still much broader and more realistic 
than that attempted by the recent English past 
tense literature. It may not even be unrealistic; 
see Pinker (1984:29-30) for a general defense of 
assuming some form of "semantic bootstrapping" 
and MacWhinney (1978:70-71) who for arguments 
for the learning of word meanings before gaining 
a productive understanding of them ("it appears 
that the use of inflections in amalgams i  stabilized 
semantically before these amalgams are analyzed 
morphologically"). Thus the learning task which 
I am attempting to address could be stated thus: 
Given a set of words and a representation 
of their meanings, determine an internalized 
representation that will allow heard and (reg- 
ular) unheard forms to be successfully pre- 
dicted and parsed. 
The  segmentat ion  prob lem is 
d i f f i cu l t  
There are many morphological issues that make 
the segmentation problem difficult. If a learner 
works on-line, then it has to be careful not to be 
sent down wrong tracks. For example, suppose a
learner already knows that the English past tense 
is regular ly/t /after  a voiceless ound. If it en- 
counters the past of burst we would expect the 
following analysis to be generated: 
(1) Mea,~i,~a Word S~,~ Tense 
\[PRIED: burst. TENSE: PAST\] burst burs t 
The stem is wrongly found to be/burs/, and could 
only perhaps be fixed after observing the present 
and deciding that some form of reanalysis i nec- 
essary. 
Many languages have ~sional morphology 
where one morpheme expresses multiple semantic 
Manning 299 The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
Christopher D. Manning (1998) The segmentation problem in morphology learning. In D.M.W. Powers (ed.) 
NeMLaP3/CoNLL98 Workshop on Paradigms and Grounding inLanguage Learning, ACL, pp 299-305. 
components. This means that looking for a con- 
sistent phonetic exponent for one meaning compo- 
nent will be in vain. For example, consider tense 
in the following data from Pocomchi: 
(2) 'to see' Present Past 
\[SUB J: I, OBJ: YOU\] tiwil ~atwil 
\[SUBJ: I, OBJ: THEM\] kiwil ~iwil 
The account of MacWhinney (1978) does not ad- 
dress fusional morhology, Pinker (1984) attempts 
to but various flaws in his proposed segmentation 
procedures mean that fusional morphology is fre- 
quently mishandled, and due to the simplicity of 
the English past tense task, none of the more re- 
cent work addresses this problem. 
Further problems are created by inflectional 
classes (declensions or conjugations). For exam- 
ple, if one starts with a bunch of words in the 
Latin ablative singular: 
(3) mensa table.ABL.SG 
serv5 slave.ABL.SG 
urbe city.ABL.SG 
manu hand.ABL.SG 
r~ thing.ABL.SG 
Then there is no (fusional) morpheme that ex- 
presses ablative singular. It has different allo- 
morphs for different inflectional classes. 
However, if the learning procedure just looks 
at stem-specific paradigms in isolation, and then 
compares the results to see if they happen to be 
similar (as Pinker (1984) suggested), there is noth- 
ing to make the learner hunt out similarity, to 
look deeper for alternative analyses that would ex- 
pose common underlying structure (much as a lin- 
guist does). It is only this latter sort of approach 
that will allow us to postulate general phono- 
logical rules. Although a symbolic morphology 
learner presumably must start with stem-specific 
paradigms, we need to have a counterbalancing 
principle of paradigm economy (Carstairs 1988), 
which collapses together stem-specific paradigms 
where possible, even when this wasn't the obvi- 
ous analysis at first. For example, consider the 
consonant-stem declension of Greek or Latin (the 
examples here are from Koin4 Greek). If we see 
the forms: 
(4) himas thong.NOM.SO 
himanta thong.ACC.SG 
himantos thong.GEN.SG 
then (if it were not for any prior knowledge of 
Greek or Latin), the obvious analysis would be: 
(5) hima- \[pred: thong\] 
- s  \[case: nora, num: sg\] 
-nta \[case: acc, num: sg\] 
-ntos \[case: gen, hum: sg\] 
and we will find other words that appear to decline 
similarly. However, when we see a reasonable col- 
lection of words of another kind: 
(6) skolops Stake.NOM.SC 
skolopa stake.ACC.SG 
skolopos stake.GEN.SG 
we can decide it would be better to reanalyze the 
forms above thus: 
(7) hima- \[pred: thong\] / _ s 
himant- \[pred: thong\] / elsewhere 
skolop- \[pred: stake\] 
-s \[case: nora, num: sg\] 
-a \[case: acc, num: sg\] 
-os \[case: gen, num: sg\] 
The key to discovering the phonological rule that 
deletes alveolars before/s/ is a notion of paradigm 
economy that suggests the reanalysis shown in (7). 
For identifying allomorphs of morphemes, 
Pinker (1984) depends heavily on a notion of "pho- 
netic material in common". However, he merely 
suggests that the definition of this notion should 
be drawn from an appropriate theory of phonol- 
ogy. But in general a theory of phonology cannot 
just take two words and tell one what their "pho- 
netic material in common" is. To consider an ex- 
ample from Latin nouns raised by Braine (1987), 
given the noun forms on/o and on/inem, the pho- 
netic material in common is going to be  On/. It 
requires a more sophisticated level of theory for- 
mation to determine that the desired root form for 
this word is actually on~in. Even in simpler cases 
of sandhi (word internal phonological changes), it
will not be immediately apparent what the stem 
of a word (or other morphemes within it) is. Con- 
sider the Japanese verb forms in (8): 
(8) nomu drink (present) 
nonda drank (past) 
nomitai want to drink 
nomimasu drink (present honorific) 
Is the stem 'drink' no, nora, or even nomi? Such 
a question cannot in general be answered simply 
using a notion of common phonetic material, but 
must. be answered in terms of a broader under- 
standing of the paradigmatic system of the lan- 
guage as a whole. 
Manning 300 The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
I 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
/ 
l 
I 
I 
/ 
/ 
l 
I 
l 
/ 
I 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
l 
MacWhinney (1978) does provide an explicit, 
if simplistic, theory of phonetic similarity. In it, 
parts of words match only if they are string iden- 
tical. But this notion is insufficient o account 
for not only sandhi effects but also many of the 
phenomena that inspired autosegmental phonol- 
ogy, that is, melodies being stretched or squashed 
to fit onto a skeleton. In particular, consider 
vowel lengthening of the sort shown in (9), from 
Hungarian: 1 
(9) SG PL 
water viiz vizek 
fire tfiiiz tiizek 
bird madaar madarak 
It is clearly necessary for a learner to be able to 
identify the stems of these words as v/z, t~z and 
madar, despite the fact that they are not segmen- 
tally identical in their two appearances. This will 
never happen if segments are simply matched one- 
for-one. 
We see that getting a start on the segmenta- 
tion problem seems to have two main components: 
working out what the allomorphs and/or underly- 
ing forms in the data are and working out the envi- 
ronments in which different allomorphs occur. For 
the first segmentation problem, we saw that nei- 
ther aUomorphs nor especially underlying forms 
can be correctly determined by just looking for 
"phonetic material in common". Indeed, we deter- 
mined the stronger esult that appropriate stems 
often cannot be determined by looking at a stem- 
specific paradigm at all, but can only be deter- 
mined by comparisons across the morphological 
system, invoking some notion of paradigm econ- 
omy. For the second problem, we can use exist- 
ing classification techniques, which have been ex- 
plored in the English past tense work. For exam- 
ple, one can use ID3, as I do here, as an algorithm 
that can find conditioning features while still be- 
ing reasonably tolerant of noise (that is, irregular 
forms) in the data. 
An  imp lemented  symbol i c  
morpho logy  learner  
My model works from being given pairs of a sur- 
face (allophonic) form and a representation f its 
meaning (this essentially consists of just encoding 
1In Hungarian orthography long vowels axe indi- 
cated by acute accents, but here I write them as dou- 
ble vowels, roughly approximating the phonetic input 
to the child. 
a word's position within paradigmatic dimensions 
of contrast, by giving it a meaning such as \[PRED: 
apple, NUM: SG, CASE: ACC\]). It works essen- 
tially as an azT-tx-stripping model of morphologi- 
cal processing with a back-end environment cat- 
egorization system based on the ID3 algorithm. 
My model and indeed all the models mentioned 
above, connectionist and symbolic alike, assume 
that morphemes and words can be satisfactorily 
represented asa linear sequence of segments. This 
flies in the face of much recent work in phonology 
(e.g., Goldsmith 1990), but works for 90% of lan- 
guages, and is a useful simplifying assumption at 
this stage. However, I will introduce mechanisms 
that allow conditioning by nearest consonants or 
vowels, and the stretching of melodies, which ac- 
tually allow us to capture some (though not all) 
of the features of an autosegmental analysis. 
The model I will present here, like all English 
past tense models, is one of conditioned allomor- 
phy that attempts to provide asolution to the two 
problems mentioned at the end of the last section: 
determining what the allomorphs of morphemes 
are and the environments where they occur. This 
is still somewhat less than a complete theory of 
phonology. So long as productive phonological 
changes are confined to inflectional endings, such a 
theory is in fact sufficient. However, if productive 
phonological rules change stems, then something 
more is needed: one must postulate phonological 
rules that can then be applied to generate the al- 
lomorphs of newly heard stems. This last task is 
not attempted here. However, it seems reasonable 
to suppose that this is a higher-order inductive 
step that would build on the results of a theory of 
learning conditioned allomorphs. 
Chopping words into morphemes Words 
and their paradigmatic meanings axe collected un- 
til a reasonable percentage of the forms for a par- 
ticular stem-specific paradigm have been seen. 
At this point a stem-specific paradigm is ana- 
lyzed. The model (heuristically) determines likely 
candidates for the first or last morph in all words 
that contain the appropriate s mantic feature (fea- 
tures are here things like TENSE or SUBJ.NUM) by 
looking at words that share a certain feature, and 
seeing if they are all phonetically similar at one 
end or the other. For each such candidate in turn, 
the model determines candidate guesses for each 
morpheme that expresses this feature. 
The model uses both similarity matching be- 
tween all words sharing a morpheme, and differ- 
ence matching from the other end with all words 
Manning 301 The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
that have the same meaning except in the value of 
the morpheme in question to determine candidate 
morpheme values, as indicated in (10): 
(10) 
b. 
a. Given carries and carried, one can at- 
tempt to learn \[PRED: CARRY\] by similarity 
matching. 
Again given carries and carried, one can 
attempt o learn either PAST or PRES.3SG 
by difference matching (since the rest of the 
morphemes in these words are identical). 
In the presence of word internal sandhi, using both 
same and difference matching will generally serve 
to delimit the boundary region wherein sandhi ef- 
fects are occurring, and the model considers the 
possibility of a morpheme break anywhere within 
this sandhi region. For example, given the follow- 
ing data: 
(11) 'foot' 'house' 
'my' kepina yotna 
'your' kepika yotda 
the program determines/a/as   value for 'your' 
by same matching, but /ka /and/dR/by  difference 
matching by looking at the two forms for 'foot' and 
'house' respectively. These two boundary points 
mark out the sandhi region within which the value 
of 'your' must be found (i.e., it is either /a/  of 
/Ca / fo r  some consonant). 
To determine whether two strings of segments 
might reasonably be two allomorphs of a mor- 
pheme, the model uses a similarity condition. This 
is measured by counting a mismatch in phono- 
logical features. The model uses fairly standard 
phonological features (based on those in Halle and 
Clements 1983). This requirement of surface sim- 
ilarity between morphs is similar to, but weaker 
than having a Unique Underlier Condition. Across 
different word-specific paradigms, the form of a 
morpheme can vary at will - the similarity condi- 
tion only applies when analyzing a word-speciflc 
paradigm, or a group of such paradignas when at- 
tempting inflectional class formation. Within a 
paradigm, if a solution satisfying the similarity 
condition cannot be found, then fusional morphs 
must be postulated. 
As well as allowing a certain amount of mis- 
match of features between 'matching' segments, 
the similarity marcher was also built to handle 
the stretching (or squeezing) of melodies. When 
a segment occurs multiple times in one form, 
the matching routine will nondeterministically at- 
tempt to match any number of copies of that seg- 
ment in one word with the segment in other words. 
In this way the Hungarian stem allomorphs dis- 
cussed in (9) can make it past the similarity con- 
dition. 
When a proposed form has been found for each 
value of a feature (i.e., each case of a case feature 
or whatever), these affixes are then stripped from 
the correct end of all words that contain them, and 
the above analysis procedure can then be applied 
recursively to the remaining partial words. With 
luck, this procedure will correctly analyze words, 
but in cases of sandhi where the learner has had to 
make guesses, there may be mistakes. The model 
includes a number of obvious heuristics to tell it 
that a mistake has been made: 
? If values have been assigned to all features, but 
there are still some segments left unassigned as 
a residue, then an error has occurred. 
? If a stem is null an error has occurred. 
(Since most analysis is done on word-specific 
paradigms, which give no evidence of contrast- 
ing stems, this can be a useful heuristic.) 
? An  initial pass examines words that differ in 
one feature and if those words are different, the 
model notes that the values of the feature con- 
cerned must be different. If a solution then tries 
to assign an identical value to these different 
morphs then an error has occurred. 
In cases of error, certain potential segmentations 
are dimiuated (where multiple possible segmen- 
tations have been generated, as in the presence 
of sandhi effects). The limiting case is when no 
possible way of chopping the word into morphs 
succeeds. As mentioned above, this is indicative 
of fusion, which was defined as a last resort when 
there is no available analysis of multiple features 
into separate morphemes (allomorphs). In such 
cases all possible analyses should fail in this first 
phase, and the model will then recursively attempt 
higher level analyses that postulate first partially 
and then finally totally fusional analyses (so that, 
for example, instead of trying to find a morpheme 
representing each case of a CASE feature, the model 
will be trying to find a morpheme representing 
each value of the crossproduct of two or more fea- 
tures, for example a value for each case and num- 
ber combination). 
On  completion of an analysis of this sort, the 
history of the morpheme stripping order can be re- 
constructed to give the morpheme order in words. 
Manning 302 The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
II 
!i 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
Additionally the program notes whether each fea- 
ture appears to be compulsorily expressed or op- 
tional in the words that it has been trained on. 
No more subtle ordering information than this is 
currently learned. 
Forming Inflectional Classes The above gives 
a plausible first attempt at a model that chops 
words into morphemes. But earlier, I argued that 
the correct chop point cannot always be discov- 
ered while looking at just a single word-specific 
paradigm. My program attempts to solve such 
problems by a process of inflectional class forma- 
tion. After a second stem-specific paradigm has 
been analyzed, the model examines the two sets of 
endings that have been generated, and determines 
whether they are similar. 2 If the endings appear 
similar, the analysis procedure described above is 
then applied to words belonging to both stems si- 
multaneously. If this analysis ucceeds (proposing 
at most the same amount of fusion as when ex- 
amining the stem-specific paradigms), then this 
reanalysis for the two words is recorded. Such a 
reanalysis can move the morpheme boundaries in 
cases uch as the Greek consonant stem declension 
discussed above (4). 
Learning phonological condit ioning Once 
words are (hopefully correctly) segmented into 
morphemes, there may still be several allomorphs 
of a morpheme, and there remains the problem of 
determining which allomorph occurs when. The 
model assumes two possible forms of allomorph 
conditioning, phonological conditioning and lex- 
ical conditioning (where the stem lexeme deter- 
mines which allomorph occurs), and uses a de- 
cision tree based learning system (with pruning) 
that can handle noisy input and disjunctive class 
descriptions i employed. To operate, the ID3 
algorithm needs a list of possible features that 
can condition changes. The list used here is the 
following: an allomorph can be conditioned by 
any phonological feature (cons, son, ant, etc.) 
of any of the preceding or following segment or 
the preceding or following \[-cons\] or \[-syl\] seg- 
ment. This captures autosegmental-phonology- 
like affects, since we are allowing the nearest con- 
sonant and vowel to also be 'adjacent' for the pur- 
poses of conditioning. If the decision tree falls to 
2The model uses an heuristic measure of similar- 
ity that focuses on the 'nucleus' of morphemes. That 
is, due to  mis takes  in segmentation, the margins of 
morphemes may well be different, but if they really 
belong to the same inflectional class, they should have 
a common core. 
find phonological conditioning features, then lexi- 
cal conditioning is assumed. 
The output decision trees are then converted to 
something more similar to conventional phonolog- 
ical rules. However, in this model, all environ- 
ments are surface conditions, so we cannot com- 
pact rule systems by using rule ordering (to selec- 
tively bleed/feed various rules). Instead a system 
of rule priorities was implemented, sothat groups 
of rules form default hierarchies (Holland et al 
1986). This notion is the same as having elsewhere 
conditions on rules, as in the notion of disjunc- 
tive rule ordering. So, rather than having either 
the decision tree in (12a) or the equivalent rule 
set in (12b), the use of a default hierarchy lets us 
use the representation shown in (12c). Rules pre- 
ceded by a number have a higher priority (equal 
to that number) and will apply in preference to 
other (usually but not necessarily more general) 
rules. Rules not preceded by a number can be re- 
garded as having priority 1. Thus a word ending 
in a \[-cont, +cor, +ant\] sound will take the allo- 
morph \[~d\], while all other sounds will receive the 
allomorph \[t\]. 
(12) a. 
-{-CONT -CONT 
t --COR +COR 
r 
t --ANT +ANT 
\[ i 
t ~1 
b. \[tense: past\] --~ t / 
\[tense: past\] --+ t / 
\[tense: past\] ~ t / 
\[tense: past\] -+ ~d / 
X 
X _ \[- co T\] 
COR J 
X _ 
COR / 
ANT J 
X 
COR / 
ANT 
c. \[tense: past\] --+ t 
Manning 303 The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
2: \[tense: past\] --+ ~d / X \[i co T1 
COR / 
ANT J 
Finally the model includes a 
simple parser/generator which can use the rules 
learned by the preceding processes to parse and 
generate morphological forms. 
Exper imenta l  Results 
I've done small studies with my model on por- 
tions of the morphological systems of a number 
of languages. Provided the language phenomena 
stay within the bounds of what the model can 
cope with (i.e., avoiding semitic and similar tem- 
platic languages), it is a fairly robust learner. I 
assure the reader that my model can also learn 
the English past tense - essentially duplicating 
Ling's results, but actually doing the segmentation 
work rather than just a classification task. Here I 
will present a small study of the tense endings of 
Anmajere verbs (Anmajere is an Australian lan- 
guage; data is from Avery Andrews (p.c., 1989)). 
In addition, small studies have shown that the 
model can learn the following examples which I 
have mentioned previously: 
? Latin nouns (this involves learning fusional case 
and number morphemes) 
? Greek consonant stems (this involves learning 
paradigm reanalyses for data such as (4) 
? Japanese verb morphology (word internal 
sandhi obscures morpheme size) 
? Hungarian nouns (9) - this requires the stretch- 
ing of melodies 
Figure 7? shows verb forms from Anmajere. 
The digraphs rr, rl, rn and rd represent a sin- 
gle sound (a trill for rr, the rest are apical reflex- 
ives), using the usual orthography for Australian 
languages (Dixon 1980). While all these verbs are 
regular, they demonstrate more subtle phonologi- 
cal conditioning than in the English past tense. A 
final labial stop of verb stems is voiced or voice- 
less depending on the voicing of the first conso- 
nant (not the next sound) of the inflection (see 
the verbs 'depart' and 'leave alone'). In the in- 
flections, the recent past has two allomorphs, hav- 
ing an apico-alveolar /n/ when the stem ends in a 
\[-COR\] consonant (for example, with arlk- 'yell'), 
Verb Present Recent past 
yell arlkeme arlken 
depart albeme alben 
leave alone imbeme imben 
hear aweme awen 
cut akeme aken 
speak agkeme agken 
cook ideme idern 
sit aneme anern 
take ineme ineru 
shape ardeme ardern 
come out arrademe arradern 
run arrjaneme arrjanern 
chuck iweme 
pop ardeme 
Figure 1. Anmajere verb forms 
Past 
arlkeke 
alpeke 
impeke 
aweke 
akeke 
agkeke 
and the retroflex /rn/ when it ends in a \[+cor\] 
consonant (for example, with id- 'cook'). 
My model can successfully earn these distribu- 
tions, producing rules such as these: 
(13) a. \[pred: yell\] --+ "arlk" 
b. \[pred: depart\] --+ "alb" / _  C 
\[+ soN\] 
c. \[pred: depart\] --, "alp" / _  C 
\[- so \] 
d. \[tense: reel --~ "ern" / X _ _  
\[+ coal 
e. \[tense: rec\] ~ "en" / X _ _  
\[- coR\] 
f. \[tense: pres\] --~ "eme" 
g. \[tense: past\] --+ "eke" 
The model chose \[+son\] rather than \[+voiced\] as 
the distinguishing feature for the first alternation, 
which gives non-distinct results for the data that 
was given. This knowledge is sufficient for the 
model to be able to fill in the remaining entries in 
the above table (as a transfer test). However, as 
noted before, the model would need to go one stage 
further and learn universally applicable phonologi- 
cal rules to be able to extend its knowledge of stem 
allomorphy from known verbs to new or nonce 
verbs. 
Manning 304 The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
R 
R 
m 
I 
m 
m 
| 
m 
m 
m 
m 
| 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
Conclusion 
This work introduces a more substantial nd re- 
alistic problem domain for morphology learning 
programs, and demonstrates a ymbolic morphol- 
ogy learner that can learn an interesting range of 
the complex morphological systems found in the 
world's languages. On the other hand, it is not 
the final word, and more work still has to be done 
on generalizing its representations and algorithms 
so that it is capable of learning the morphology of 
all human languages. 
REFERENCES 
Archangeli, D. 1988. Aspects of underspecifica- 
tion theory. Phonology 5:183-208. 
Braine, M. D. S. 1987. What is learned in ac- 
quiring word classes--a step toward an acquisi- 
tion theory. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), Mecha- 
nisms of Language Acquisition, 65-87. Hillsdale, 
N J: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Carstairs, A. 1988. Nonconcatenative inflec- 
tion and paradigm economy. In M. Hammond 
and M. Noonan (Eds.), Theoretical Morphology: 
Approaches in Modern Linguistics, 71-77. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Dixon, R. M. W. 1980. The Languages of Aus- 
tralia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Goldsmith, J. A. 1990. Autosegmental and Met- 
rical Phonology. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Halle, M., and G. N. Clements. 1983. Problem 
book in phonology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Holland, J. It., K. J. Holyoak, R. E. Nisbett, and 
P. R. Thagard. 1986. Induction: proceses of in- 
ference, learning and discovery. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Lachter, J., and T. G. Bever. 1988. The relation 
between linguistic structure and associative theo- 
ries of language l arning--a constructive critique 
of some connectionist learning models. Cognition 
28:195-247. 
Ling, C. X. 1994. Learning the past tense of en- 
glish verbs: the symbolic pattern associator vs. 
connectionist models. Journal of Artificial Intel- 
ligence Research 1:209--229. 
Ling, C. X., and M. Marinov. 1993. Answering 
the connectionist challenge: a symbolic model of 
learning the past ense of english verbs. Cognition 
49:235-290. 
MacWhinney, B. 1978. The acquisition of mor- 
phophonology. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development, 43(1-2, Serial 
No. 174). 
MacWhinney, B., and J. Leinbac~. 1991. Imple- 
mentations are not conceptualizations: Revising 
the verb learning model. Cognition 40:121-157. 
Marcus, G. F., S. Pinker, M. Ullman, M. Hol- 
lander, T. J. Rosen, and F. Xu. 1992. Overregu- 
larization in Language Acquisition. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Mooney, R. J., and M. E. Califf. 1995. Induction 
of first-order decision lists: Results on learning 
the past tense of english verbs. Journal of Arti- 
ficial Intelligence Research 3:1-24. 
Mooney, R. J., and M. E. Califf. 1996. Learn- 
ing the past tense of english verbs using induc- 
tive logic programming. In S. Wermter, E. Riloff, 
and G. Scheler (Eds.), Symbolic, Connectionist, 
and Statistical Approaches to Learning for Natu- 
ral Language Processing. Springer Verlag. 
Peters, A. M. 1983. The units of language acqui- 
sition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Pinker, S. 1984. Language Learnability and Lan- 
guage Development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Pinker, S., and A. Prince. 1988. On language and 
connectionism: Analysis of a parallel distributed 
processing model of language acquisition. Cogni- 
tion 28:73-193. 
Rumelhart, D. E., and J. L. McClelland. 1986. 
On learning the past tenses of English verbs. In 
J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), 
Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in 
the Mierostructure of Cognition, Vol. 2,216-271. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Manning 305 The segmentation problem in morphology learning 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
mm 
m 
m 
