A mark up language for tagging discourse and annotating 
documents in context sensitive interpretation environments 
Graziella Tonfoni 
The George Washington University 
Declassilication Productivity Research Center (DPRC) 
Ashburn, VA 20147 
tonfoni@seas.gwu.edu 
and 
DSLO-University of Bologna-Italy 
tonfoni@alma.unibo.it 
Abstract 
A mark up language for tagging discourse, 
and for converting discourse sequences into 
a written format, according to highly context 
sensitive procedures, will be illustrated as 
well as a system for document annotation. 
The context in which a given 
communicative intercourse has taken place 
needs to be made available to ensure 
consistent interpretation of both single 
sequences of discourse and global concepts 
that are carried along during the dialogue or 
conversation. Full vis~ility of different 
communicative intentions that reflect the 
evolution of conversations in time and 
space, as well as access to various modes of 
communicative actions and changing 
conditions of interpretation, is relevant and 
necessary, especially in contexts where 
interaction is based upon asynchronous 
communication. Interpretation ~hif~s, that 
each sequence of a dialogue is likely to 
undergo, may create distortions in the 
interpretation of the overall intercourse and 
communicative action leading to the 
creation of the final document. Some 
contextual concretions, which may be based 
upon false assumptions, are particularly 
powerful Persistent interpretative links 
may be evoked and activated at any time, 
even if unintentionally. Special attention 
needs to be paid to ensure that undesirable 
links are not established and unintentional 
contextual concretions are not added. Use 
of a consistently applied, commonly shared 
conceptual tool for assit~ning context- 
sensitive interpretative values to each 
sequence of discourse holds great promise 
for avoidance of this problem Appropriately 
packaged ocuments and parts of documents 
could carry along their own originating 
context of discourse in the form of attached 
information. Accurate illustrations using a 
fidly functional set of tools I have developed 
are provided here to show how fi~zziness 
and misinterpretation (caused by an absence 
of consistent interpretative clues about 
originating contextual conditions for 
discourse and conversations) may be 
significantly reduced or even eliminated. 
Introduction 
A document comes ~om "somewhere in 
time and space and leads toward somewhere 
else"(Tonfoni, 1998). 
It may therefore be defined as a piece of 
information that has been derived t~om a 
94 
dynamically evolving information flow 
before it is converted into a stable form, e.g., 
hardcopy (Tonfoni 1996, 1998). Documents 
are derivative products of flows of 
conversations and various kinds of 
communicative intercourse, which may 
include a very high level of complexity and 
long duration. Documents and 
conversations, ~om which those documents 
were generated, are therefore two very 
tightly linked components hat often play a 
crucial role in providing evidence for 
decision making. It is our claim that 
enhanced encoding procedures in the form 
of discourse tagging and labelling may be 
harmoniously linked by means of a 
consistent annotation system (Tonfoni 1998) 
to support accurate conversion of dialogues 
and discourse into a more stable format. 
This is what documentation is all about. 
The discourse tagging system presented here 
is based on and harmonious linked to an 
annotation system, which consists of a set of 
signs and symbols as follows: 
Discourse tagging and document 
annotation signs: to indicate the 
communicative function of a sequence 
of discourse, which is ultimately to 
become apiece of a document. 
Discourse tagging and document 
annotation symbols: to indicate the 
communicative s~le of each sequence 
of discourse, which is ultimately to 
become apiece of a document. 
- Discourse tagging and document 
annotation turn taking symbols: to 
indicate 
roles and interplay between the 
discourse partners that are carried along 
during the 
information conversion process and 
successively attached to the resulting 
document. 
Context sensitivity may be significantly 
enhanced by the consistent use of 
interpretation devices, designed to prevent 
filthiness and misunderstanding from 
occurring. Some contextual links, if not 
properly handled, may be powerful enough 
to radically shifl the scenario. The 
originating context may in fact be easily 
modified and completely distorted, even if 
unintentionally. Such links need to be 
accurately identified and then efiminated by 
repositioning, either by reassessing the 
originating context or assessing the new and 
intended one. 
A context sensitive mark up language for 
converting discourse sequences into 
document pieces. 
Discourse tagging and document 
annotation signs: The following represent 
the various communicative functions a 
docm~ent may convey, on a paragraph by 
paragraph basis, as a result of consistent 
conversation of discourse sequences into 
document pieces. 
II - Square: for an informative document or piece of a document, 
which carries information about a 
specific conversational event. 
Indicates that information conversion 
has been derived from an informative 
discourse sequence. 
D Square within the Square: for a summary of a given document that 
has been produced to reinforce 
contextual consistency between the 
conversational context in which the 
discourse first occurred and its 
conversion i to a larger document. 
Frame: for a document or piece of a 
document that is found to be 
analogous (in content) to other 
? 95  
? 
E3 
D 
documents which refer to pr~Aous!y 
stored information, some of which 
may still be available in discourse 
format. Normally, conversion occurs 
~,om discourse format into document 
format. 
Triangle: for a memory and history 
generated out of a certain document. 
This is meant to establish topical 
continuity wdth background 
information, which may still only be 
available in its discourse format and 
still need to be converted into 
document format. 
Circle: for a main concept conveyed 
by a certain document, which has 
been abstracted and linked to other 
doc~ents, to show topical 
confimfity, It is meant to reinforce 
topical word identification and to 
effectb;e!y l'mk together documents 
-with the same word and sequences of 
discourse prior to their conversion 
into document format, Both 
discourse and document (may) use 
the same topical words. 
Grouped Semicircles: for main 
concepts, which are abstracted out of 
an originating document, Establishes 
both topical continu'~ and context 
consistency between the ori_ginafing 
document, and a set of topical words 
and links to sequences of discourse 
prior to conversion i to a doc~.ment 
format, Here again, both discourse 
and document (may) use the same 
topical words. 
Semicircle: for a locally identified 
concept, abstracted out of a piece of 
document and meant to reinforce 
context consistency by establishing 
further links to other documents. 
These links may be triggered by the 
same topical word. It is also meant o 
trigger sequences of discourse prior 
to convermon i to a document format 
and using the same topical word~ 
Inscribed .Ares: for indicating the 
need for an upgrade and/or update of 
a certain document. Indicates that a 
revision process is likely to occur, 
although it does not identify if it will 
be a major or minor revision. 
Revision may be based on 
conversion of discourse sequences 
into additional pieces of a document 
or into various alterations. 
Opened Text Space: for indicating 
that an upgrade and/or update has 
indeed occurred and that the 
document has now reached 'a new 
re~Asion state. It is meant to show 
that the structure of the ~evious 
document has been affected by 
discursive information, but does not 
identify if the revision has been a 
major or a minor one,, 
Right Triangle: for a comment 
made about a given document or 
piece of a document, for the case 
where more contextual information 
is needed. This information is not 
available in a document format and 
has to be derived f~om other ~xternal 
relevant sources based upon topical 
continuity. 
Discourse tagging and document 
annotation symbols are used to indicate 
communicative intentions and styles, locally 
within the discourse, such that discourse 
sequences can be consistently and accurate!y 
interpreted with the the additional 
information they provide. They are 
particularly useful for showing contributions 
made by individuals in either synchronous 
or asynchronous conversations, and for 
supporting co-ordination and "m?ormation 
com, ersion for production of a document, 
96 
These information-containing elements may 
be conveniently incorporated into the final 
document to provide clues about he nature 
of the original information conversion 
process. Document annotation symbols, 
therefore, represent different modes of 
information conversion (from a discourse) 
which may be packaged with the originating 
context, and activated at a later time. They 
may be combined and used dynamically for 
Narrate: from Latin tuTrro: tell 
the story. 
It means complementing the discourse or the 
document with various facts and events 
(from the originating context) by following 
a logical and chronological order. They may 
be used either in the form of discourse or in 
the form of the document itself. In other 
words, it indicates a set of major points or 
facts representing different diachronic 
further information conversion purposes, stages, which are closely linked. 
II such as further discussions, because they 
effectively indicate transitional states w/thln , ~  Point out: take a single point 
1 a discourse that may be evolving in time and -----o---- out of a story chain. 
\[\] space: They are of the following types: It means to isolate a specific 
\[\] ? 
\[\] 
Describe: from Latin describo: 
write around. 
It means complementing the original 
discourse or document by adding as 
much relevant information as may be 
found from previous discourse, 
without any specific onstraints. 
It may also indicate the need for further 
information to be put together in discourse 
format or in document format. It is 
represented by a spiral, which starts from its 
middle point, to indicate a flow of 
information from topical words, towards an 
expanding topic and linking with other 
information. The other information can 
come from different discourse sequences or 
from other elevant documents or pieces of 
documents. 
Define: from Latin definio: put 
limits. 
It means complementing the 
document or the discourse with limited 
information about a defined topical word, 
which has been previously selected and 
identified as the most relevant. The point in 
the middle of the square represents 
relevance. The concept indicates that here is 
a real need to incorporate available, highly 
specific information about a relevant 
discourse or document. 
event or fact (among those reported as 
discourse or occurring within a document) 
by focusing on just one sequence or a piece 
of document, and adding more detailed 
reformation. Information is added by as a 
significant expansion and linked with other 
relevant discourse sequences ordocuments. 
Explain: from Latin explano: 
unwrap, open up. 
It means that facts and reasons are 
r ? given to support interpretation f
an event, within a certain 
discourse or document. Explanation may 
start by indicating the originating cause and 
proceeding logically toward the effects or by 
starting with the effects and going 
backwards towards the cause, depending on 
which approach is found to be the most 
effective. 
\ [ \ [~\ [  Regress: from Latin regredior: 
go back. 
I I ~1 "1 It means that more information 
about a topic, presented uring a given 
discourse sequence or within a document, is
absolutely necessary for understanding. 
Information may come in verbal format and 
then be converted into document format. It 
represents a topic-oriented process and an in 
depth information expansion, which is 
activated only for the precise topic being 
considered. 
97 
Inform: from Latin informo: put 
into shape, shape up. 
It means that any discourse and 
document is the result of an information 
packaging process, and that the specific 
discourse and document under consideration 
is organised in the most unconstrained way, 
as the result of many information conversion 
operations. 
It leads toward two different kinds of further 
specification, which are respectively 
conveyed by the "inform synthetically" and 
the "inform analytically" indication. 
''inform synthetically" means 
departing from a larger discourse or 
document 
and proceeding toward a summary (related 
to a specific topic) which is the most 
relevant one emerging from the originating 
discourse and document. 
"inform analytically" means 
departing from a limited discourse 
and document and expanding toward further 
discourse sequences and documents by 
adding more information, which needs to he 
then converted into the final form of a 
document, and is not available yet. 
Reformulate: from Latin 
reformo/reformulo: change 
shape and reshape. 
It means changing the style, which was 
previously adopted, either in the discourse 
or in the document, and substituting one 
form of information packaging with a 
different but related (same discourse or 
document) packaging. It may turn produce 
(a more or less) radical transformation f the 
originating context, according to a precisely 
defined request or set of requests. 
Express: from Latin exprimo: 
push out and press out. 
It means adding personal opinions and 
individual feelings related to facts and 
98 
events during a discourse or within a 
document. It indicates the most subjective 
mode of information organisation, which 
may be clearly influenced by and hound to 
personal evaluations, judgements and 
emotional states. 
Discourse tagging and document 
annotation turn taking symbols are meant 
to define the mode of interpretation of a 
certain discourse and of accessing a certain 
document, requested at each given time; 
they are provided to facilitate accurate 
context transport. 
They are the following ones: 
Major Scale: it shows that literal 
interpretation is needed and that 
those sequences of discourse or 
pieces of documents indicated and 
marked ot~ should be extracted and 
quoted literary, the way they were 
first intended to be. 
Minor Scale: k shows that accurate 
interpretation may need a further 
process of abstraction and that 
sequences of discourse and pieces of 
documents indicated and marked oK 
may need significant interpretation 
processes due to heavy context 
constraints. 
Open or Unsaturated Rhythm: it 
shows that accessing the discourse 
and document at the present stage 
may lead to an incomplete interpretation f
those facts and events, which are presented. 
It is meant o suggest accessing a broader 
discourse and larger document and acquiring 
many and various kinds of sources, some of 
which may not yet be available. 
Tight or Saturated Rhythm: it 
shows that accessing the 
document will lead the user 
toward complete interpretation f those facts 
and events, which are presented. It suggests 
that the user should hold fast to the 
interpretation provided, though access to 
other sources of supportive vidence is also 
available. 
Discourse tagging and document 
annotation amplifier symbols come last 
and may be added only after the previously 
illustrated ones have been used. They apply 
to larger discourse sequences and 
documentation territories and indicate 
specific operations, which are to be 
performed in order to connect 
conversational actions and sets of 
documents, which have been previously 
encoded and accurately stored. 
They are as follows: 
Choose: it is meant o represent the 
"x..~ynamic process of first identif3~ing 
and then deciding between different 
contexts for interpretation, which are 
mutually exclusive, given a certain set of 
conversations, which have occurred and 
documents, which have been derived 
accordingly, but seem to have different 
possible volutions. 
I Identify: it is meant o represent a
> definition of a more specific context 
within a broader context, for 
interpretation of a set of conversations, 
which have occurred and for documents hat 
have been derived. It naturally occurs 
before "search" and "select". 
Search: it is meant o represent the 
dynamic process of choosing among 
different contexts for interpretation 
of a set of conversations, which have 
occurred and documents, which have been 
derived and are many and compatible as to 
find the most appropriate one. 
Select: it is meant to represent 
~ ~/  multiple contexts that may evolve 
(either synchronously or 
asynchronously) and may be modified, once 
a certain decision making process has been 
performed. It is based upon a certain 
discourse that was converted into a 
document and stored. 
Copy/Replicate: it is meant to 
represent he dynamic process of 
duplication and repetition of a 
context, which ff lost, would affect 
understanding and accuracy of interpretation 
of events and facts that have been organised, 
first in the form of discourse and then 
converted into a document. 
Ahead: it is meant o represent the 
progression of a conversation to 
become a document or set of 
documents, which are linked 
together by context consistency or 
harmoniously shifting contexts. 
Back: it is meant to represent the 
need to go back to delete and replace 
the originating context, which has 
radically shifted, in the course of 
various transition states, during an 
ongoing conversation such that, if 
not eliminated, would indeed affect 
consistent interpretation f a whole 
set of documents, which are based 
upon it. 
Conflict; it is meant o represent an 
emerging inconsistency and 
incompatibility between various 
context attributions to a set of 
conversations to be converted into 
documents, the context needs to be 
cleared as to proceed toward any 
further interpretation. 
The discourse tagging and document 
annotation system we have illustrated here 
(including its various components) may be 
appfied at different layers and at various 
levels of complexity. 
99 
Following this perspective, discourse 
context may be enhanced through visual 
clues or symbols to provide a very powerful 
means to monitor inherent complexity of 
any communicative intercourse and to 
reduce possible distortions which may 
OCCur. 
Conclusions 
This system for tagging discourse provides 
consistent and harmonious linkages to the 
original context in the form of a mark up 
language for visually annotating 
documentation. It has been extensively and 
intensively tested in many and various 
context and languages .The acronym, CPP -- 
TKS stands for Communicative Positioning 
Program-- Text Kepresentation Systems. 
What is therefore indicated is that icons 
representing precise operations performed 
upon texts, both in their verbal and written 
dimensions, carry the effective intentionality 
to be encapsulated. Encoding and pre- 
programming a document means precisely 
complementing a document with all of the 
instructions that are necessary to enhance 
understanding of context. Visual 
programming of a document (based on 
previous discourse) provides the ability to 
categorise and classify information and to 
carry the full details of a context into the 
(delicate) process of information conversion 
to ensure the most reliable final product, 
e.g., the document. 
Acknowledgements 
The author sincerely thanks Dr. Richard 
Scotti, Director of the DPKC, for reading 
this paper, prior to its submittal, and more 
for having captured the relevance of the 
most important features of her system and 
approach, creating the appropriate 
conditions for producing practical 
applications of it in the real world. 
Basic references 
Tonfoni, G., 1996, Communication Patterns 
and Textual Forms, Intellect, Exeter, U.K.. 
Tonfoni, G., 1998, Information Design: The 
Knowledge Architect's Toolkit, Scarecrow 
Press, Lanham, Maryland, U.S. 
100 
