EL IC IT ING NATURAL SPEECH FROM NON-NATIVE  
USERS:  COLLECT ING SPEECH DATA FOR LVCSR 
Laura  Mayf ie ld  Tomok iyo  and Susanne Burger  
Interactive Systems Laboratories 
Language Technologies Inst i tute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
P i t tsburgh,  PA 15213 USA 
{laura,sburger}@cs.cmu.edu 
Abst rac t  
In this paper, we discuss the design of a database 
of recorded and transcribed read and sponta- 
neous speech of semi-fluent, strongly-accented 
non-native speakers of English. While many 
speech applications work best with a recognizer 
that expects native-like usage, others could ben- 
efit from a speech recognition component that is 
forgiving of the sorts of errors that are not a 
barrier to communication; in order to train such 
a recognizer a database of non-native speech is 
needed. We examine how collecting data from 
non-native speakers must necessarily differ from 
collection from native speakers, and describe 
work we did to develop an appropriate scenario, 
recording setup, and optimal surroundings dur- 
ing recording. 
1 In t roduct ion  
As part of work in improving speech recognition 
performance for non-native speakers, we wanted 
to develop a database that captures ways in 
which non-native language use differs from na- 
tive language use in a specific domain. Features 
we were interested in include pronunciation, lex- 
ical choice, syntax, expressive goals, and strate- 
gies speakers use when they are unsure of the 
appropriate English expression. We wanted the 
recorded ata to be appropriate for LVCSR sys- 
tem training, which means that the signal qual- 
ity should be good and the speech should be as 
close as possible in terms of style and content 
to speech that will be used in the target ap- 
plication, a tourist information query system. 
We also wanted to elicit data which would con- 
tain examples of systematic and unsystematic 
variation in the speech of low- to mid-fluency 
non-native speakers. 
One of the most interesting aspects of these 
experiments was the ways in which we found 
5 
ourselves needing to adapt our usual data col- 
lection strategies to the needs of our speakers, 
whose English abilities varied from beginning 
to near-native. It is important o be aware of 
a number of assumptions that are commonly 
made which do not necessarily hold for non- 
native speakers, and which it is important o 
address when designing a data collection proto- 
col. 
The  act of  speak ing  is not  diff icult. 
When recording native speakers peaking spon- 
taneously for standard LVCSR projects (that is, 
not projects geared towards pecial populations 
or difficult tasks), it is assumed that the the act 
of speaking does not in and of itself represent 
a major cognitive load for the speaker. This 
can be very untrue of non-native speakers, and 
we had several speakers ask to quit in the mid- 
dle of the recording because they felt unable to 
continue. The researcher needs to make a deci- 
sion about what to do in such a situation, and 
possibly prepare an alternate task. 
There  is l i tt le r isk of  a l ienat ing the  
communi ty .  Local communities of non-native 
speakers are not always large, and if it is close 
knit, word can quickly spread if the task is 
too hard or embarassing. Also, it is impor- 
tant to de-emphasize the fact that we are in- 
terested, among other things, in imperfections 
in the speaker's peech, or risk offending the 
community. 
The  task  is not  perce ived as a test .  
Again, when speaking spontaneously, few native 
speakers of nonstigmatized varieties of English 
would feel that they are being evaluated on the 
correctness of their speech. Many non-native 
speakers will feel tested, and as this can make 
them nervous and affect their speech, it is im- 
portant o reassure them as far as possible that 
they are not being tested and that the data is 
being anonymized. 
The  speaker  knows what  to say. Most 
spontaneous collection tasks are chosen because 
they are tasks speakers can be expected to have 
done before and be comfortable with. Although 
a non-native speaker has probably made an air- 
plane reservation i  his native language before, 
it is entirely possible that he has never done 
so in the target language, and does not have a 
good idea of what he should say in that situ- 
ation. If he were really planning to make an 
airplane reservation in the target language, he 
would probably think about what to say in ad- 
vance and might even ask someone, which he 
may not have a chance to do during the data 
collection. This undermines the representative- 
ness of the database. 
We carried out a number of exploratory ex- 
periments to try to determine the format which 
was the most comfortable for the speaJ~ers and 
which resulted in elicitation of the most natu- 
ral data; two of these experiments are described 
in Section 3. For these experiments we worked 
with native speakers of Japanese. The protocol 
that we settled on, which we feel is very effec- 
tive for non-native speakers, is described in Sec- 
tion 4. Although transcription and analysis of 
this data is at the beginning stages, we have al- 
ready seen patterns that will be useful for devel- 
oping acoustic and language models. Examples 
are shown in Section 5. 
2 Re la ted  Work  
Byrne et al(Byrne and others, 1998) describe 
a conversational English data collection pro- 
tocol with native speakers of Spanish as its 
targets. They identified their speakers with 
one of three skill levels and had them per- 
form level-appropriate asks designed to elicit 
specific grammatical structures. Participants 
spoke over the telephone with other non-native 
speakers, forcing them to communicate using 
speech. They found that this was an effec- 
tive way to elicit spontaneous speech from non- 
native speakers of all fluency levels in a purely 
conversational domain. 
A number of studies discuss techniques for 
collecting spoken data from non-native speak- 
ers in the context of a language tutoring sys- 
tem. Most such systems ((Eskenazi, 1997; Witt 
6 
and Young, 1997; Kawai and Hirose, 1997) are 
examples) ask users to read a prompt or nar- 
rowly constrain what the user is allowed to say. 
Neumeyer et al (Neumeyer et al, 1998) de- 
scribe a system that evaulates students' pronun- 
ciation in text-independent speech. They col- 
lected a database of read speech, both newspa- 
per and conversational sentences, and imitated 
speech, in which students imitated the speech of 
native speakers; as subjects, they used Ameri- 
can students of French. 
Aist et al (Aist and others, 1998) discuss 
considerations in collecting speech from chil- 
dren, pointing out that children may be uncoop- 
erative and easily bored, and may have difficulty 
reading. They describe an unsupervised ata 
collection method in which recognized speech 
is compared to the transcript that the child 
is expected to read, and utterances in which 
part or all of hypothesis match the transcript 
are used for additional system training. This 
type of technique is not as effective for a system 
that handles completely spontaneous queries, 
but their observations about children's abilities 
(especially articulatory and reading difficulties) 
and reaction to formalized ata collection par- 
allel ours in our study of non-native speakers. 
Outside the field of speech recognition, much 
research as been done into methods for elicit- 
ing natural speech. Briggs (Briggs, 1986) em- 
phasizes the importance of understanding the 
meaning of the speech event for the speaker. 
Recording for a research project may be a fa- 
miliar event for the researcher, but not for 
the speaker. Reading aloud is commonplace 
in American schools, but participants of differ- 
ent backgrounds may be intimidated or even of- 
fended when asked to read aloud. While native 
speakers of English certainly vary in their com- 
fort reading and speaking, when the researchers 
are also native speakers of English, there are far 
fewer cultural variables that can lead to misun- 
derstanding and compromise the integrity of the 
data. 
In his description of the field methodology 
in the project on linguistic change and varia- 
tion, Labov (Labov, 1984) describes a number 
of issues in spoken data collection, mentioning 
among other things the long-term relationship 
with the speaker pool. This is of course impor- 
tant for both longitudinal studies; also, when 
studying the speech of a restricted group, it is 
important hat people do not come out of the 
data collection experience f eling that they have 
been objectified or misunderstood. Labov re- 
turns to this point in the context of ethical con- 
siderations in data collection. 
What exactly does "natural speech" mean in 
the case of the non-native speaker? Wolfson 
(Wolfson, 1976) defines the notion of natural 
speech "as properly equivalent o that of ap- 
propriate speech; as not equivalent o unself- 
conscious peech." That is, in some situations, 
it is natural to speak carefully, and that care- 
ful speech in such contexts hould not be con- 
sidered unnatural. For semi-fluent non-native 
speakers, whether they are at a real informa- 
tion desk or recording a contrived scenario, their 
speech will most likely be planned. 
3 P i lo t  Exper iments  
3.1 Record ing  Setup  
All recordings were taken by a DAT recorder; 
speakers wore a Sennheiser headset. Recordings 
were done in a small computer lab with some 
incidental noise but no excessive outside noise. 
On some occasions there were other people in 
the room when the recording was being done; 
this will be discussed further below. In non- 
interactive recordings, users were seated at a 
table with the instruction sheets, pen or pencil, 
and water. Speakers were permitted to stop and 
restart recording at any time. 
We did two pilot experiments which greatly 
helped us to understand the needs of our speak- 
ers and how we could make them more com- 
fortable, in turn improving the quality of our 
data. For these experiments, we recorded na- 
tive speakers of Japanese. 
3.1.1 P i lot  exper iment  one  
In the first experiment, we drew from a human- 
machine collection task that we had had success 
with for native speakers in a similar applica- 
tion in another domain. Speakers were provided 
with prompts such as the following: 
? Ask how to get to the museum 
? Find out where you can exchange money 
? Ask where to get a ticket for the subway 
Speakers came in on two different occasions 
and gave us feedback after both. The first 
time they came in, they were given the prompts 
7 
in English. As we had predicted, they were 
strongly influenced in their word choice by the 
phrasings used in the prompts. The second 
time they came in, they were given the prompts 
in their native language . They felt that this 
task was much harder; they perceived it as a 
translation task in which they were expected to 
give a correct answer, whereas with the English 
prompts they were effectively given the correct 
answer. Their productions, however, were more 
varied, different both from each other and from 
the original English prompt. 
In addition to the prompt-based task, we had 
speakers read from a local travel guide, specifi- 
cally about the university area so that the con- 
text would be somewhat familiar. We found 
that there were indeed reading errors of the type 
that would not occur in spontanous speech. 
We observed that some speakers were stum- 
bling over words that they obviously didn't 
know. We attempted to normalize for this by 
having them read utterances that had been pre- 
viously recorded and transcribed, hoping that 
they would be more likely to be familiar with 
words that other speakers of similar fluency had 
used. We still found that they had some dif- 
ficulty in reading. Our speakers were native 
speaker s of Japanese, however, which has a dif- 
ferent writing system; this would have some in- 
fluence. 
There was also a fair amount of stumbling 
over words in the prompted tasks, especially 
with proper nouns, and we have not yet looked 
at the correspondence between stumbling in 
read speech of familiar words and stumbling in 
spontaneous speech. It may be the case that 
they are more closely related than they are for 
native speakers. 
3.1.2 P i lot  exper iment  two  
In the second pilot experiment, we attempted a 
wizard-of-oz collection using an interactive map; 
the speakers could ask for locations and routes 
to be highlighted in the map, and there was a 
text screen to which the wizard could send mes- 
sages to answer speaker queries. Instead of a list 
of prompts, the speakers were given a sheet of 
paper listing some points of interest in the city, 
hotel names, some features that they could ask 
about (business hours, location, etc.) and the 
dates that they would be in the city. Their task 
was to plan a weekend, finding hotels, restau- 
rants, and things to do. Our thought was that 
perhaps peakers would speak more naturally in 
an information-gathering task, where they are 
actually trying to communicate instead of sim- 
ply producing sentences. 
Our general impression was that although the 
visual highlighting of the locations was a fea- 
ture that the users enjoyed, and which helped 
them to become involved in the task, the utter- 
ances could not be characterized as more nat- 
ural than those given in the prompted task. It 
was also our feeling that speakers were less sure 
of what to do in a less structured task; both 
lack of confidence in speaking and unfamiliar- 
ity with a "just say whatever comes to mind" 
approach contributed to their general discom- 
fort. It took time to read and understand the 
responses from the wizard; also, speakers were 
aware that someone (the wizard) was listening 
in. Both of these factors were additional sources 
of self-consciousness. Although we thought hat 
the repair dialogues that came about when the 
wizard misunderstood the speaker were valuable 
data, and that someone trained to provide re- 
sponses geared toward the fluency level of the 
speaker would have more success as a wizard, it 
was our opinion that given the range of fluency 
levels we were targeting, wizard-of-oz collection 
would not be ideal for the following two reasons: 
? communication and speaker confidence 
break down when the speaker is really hav- 
ing trouble expressing himself and the wiz- 
ard cannot understand 
? simulating a real-life experience, such as 
making a hotel reservation, without the 
real goal of wanting to stay in a hotel 
and background knowledge about the trip, 
can be very difficult depending on language 
ability and cultural background 
4 F ina l  P ro toco l  
The final data collection protocol that we set- 
tled on has three parts. The first is a series 
of scenarios, in each of which a situation is de- 
scribed in the speaker's native language (L1) 
and a list is given in bullet form of things rele- 
vant to the situation that the speaker is to ask 
about. For instance, if the situation is a Pitts- 
burgh Steelers game, the speakers would see the 
bullets 
? arena location 
? ticket price 
? seat availability 
? transportation 
? game time 
The bullets are made as short as possible so 
that the speakers absorb them in a glance and 
can concentrate onformulating an original ques- 
tion instead of on translating a specific phrase 
or sentence. 
The second part is a read task. There was 
no doubt left after the pilot experiments hat 
the amount of patience speakers had with the 
prompted task was limited; after the novelty 
wore off speakers tired quickly. Although spon- 
taneous data would be better than read data, 
read data would be better than no data, and 
speakers eemed willing to continue at least 
as long again reading as they had with the 
prompted task. We considered two types of 
material for the reading. Some sort of pho- 
netically balanced text is often used for data 
collection, so that the system is trained with a 
wide variety of phonetic contexts. Given that 
our speakers are even more restricted in their 
phrasings than native speakers are in conversa- 
tional speech, it is likely that some phonetic on- 
texts are extremely sparsely represented in our 
data. However, it may be the case that semi- 
fluent speakers avoid some constructions pre- 
cisely because they are difficult to pronounce, 
and a sparsity in the training data probably is 
a good predictor of a sparsity in unseen data; 
even with new words, which may have as-yet- 
unseen phonetic contexts, non-native speakers 
may not pronounce them at all in the way that 
the designer of the phonetically balanced text 
had anticipated. We chose a 1000-word version 
of the fairy tale Snow White for our read texts; 
it had the highest syllable growth rate of any of 
the fairy tales we looked at and we augmented 
the syllable inventory by replacing some words 
with others, trying to ensure at the same time 
that all of the words were ones our speakers were 
likely to have encountered before. 
Finally, we ask speakers to read a selection of 
previously recorded and transcribed utterances 
from the prompted task, both by native speak- 
ers and non-native speakers, randomly selected 
8 
and with small modifications made to preserve 
anonymity. Our objective here was threefold: to 
quantify the difference between read dialogues 
and spontaneous dialogues; to quantify the dif- 
ference between read dialogues and read prose; 
and to compare the performance of the end 
recognizer on native grammar with non-native 
pronunciation with performance on non-native 
grammar with non-native pronunciation. 
We have recorded 23 speakers o far in the 
post-pilot phase of data collection, and all have 
expressed satisfaction with the protocol. 
5 Ana lys i s  and  Examples  
Although transcription and analysis of the data 
we have collected so far is in the beginning 
stages, we have observed patterns that lead us 
to believe that our protocol is meeting our goals 
of eliciting speech from non-native speakers that 
is representative of what they would use in a real 
system and that begins to uncover patterns that 
are different from those native speakers use and 
will be useful in acoustic and language model- 
ing. 
The analysis in this section is based on tran- 
scribed data from 12 speakers. For compari- 
son, we recorded three native speakers doing the 
same task the non-native speakers did (with En- 
glish prompts). This is not a large sample, but 
gives us some evidence to support our intuitions 
about what native speakers would be likely to 
say. 
5.1 Qua l i ta t ive  Analys is  
Examples 1-3 show some sample utterances 
produced by the non-native speakers. In 
each example, the first sentence represents the 
prompt that would have been used for elicita- 
tion (speakers were actually given short bullets). 
Example 1 was selected t o exemplify how speak- 
ers were influenced in their use of phrasal and 
colloquial verbs when given an Englishprompt. 
We observed that when prompted to ask for di- 
rections or travel time, native speakers almost 
always used the expression "get to." Non-native 
speakers often used this form when given an 
English prompt containing it, but almost never 
when given an L1 prompt. 
1. Ask  how to get to the aquarium. 
How do I get the aquarium? 
Please let me know how do you go the 
aquarium? 
I'd like to go to Aquarium. 
I want to go to the aquarium so please 
let me know how to go to there 
In the data we have transcribed so far, 25 of 
55 uses of get to were by non-native speakers, 
while 45 of 56 uses of go to were by non-native 
speakers. 
Example 2 illustrates how number agreement 
can be influenced by the Enghsh prompt. Al- 
though nativespeakers often misspeak and dis- 
obey agreement rules in conversational speech, 
there are situations in which we observed that 
they are consistently careful, and the pattern 
any + Npl, when appropriate, was one. The 
non-native speakers, on the other hand, consis- 
tently produced any + Nsing when not primed 
by an English prompt. "Any" was also often 
used where a native speaker would use "a." 
2. Ask  if there  are any  \ [ restaurants  
nearby  / t ickets ava i lab le . . .  \]. 
Is there any restaurant around here? 
is there any good place to visit 
is there any available ticket 
do you have any special exhibition 
now 
is there any subway around 
Of the 105 instances of use of the word "any," 
52 were followed inappropriately by a singular 
noun. When the pattern "any place" is removed 
from the list, 52 out of 81 instances were gram- 
matically incorrect in this way. To compare, 
1 of 21 instances in the native sample were 
grammatically incorrect. Prescriptively incor- 
rect grammar is expected in spontaneous speech 
even by native speakers. However, when non- 
native speech consistently strays from patterns 
observed in native speech, the bigram and tri- 
gram contexts used to model language at the 
sentence l vel can no longer be relied upon. 
Of course, by using an L1 prompt we are 
influencing the speakers in the opposite direc- 
tion, priming them to produce a translation of 
an L1 word and form an awkward English sen- 
tence around it when they might not do so in 
spontaneous system use. It is difficult to know 
whether this is the case with example 3. On 
the one hand, the speaker is clearly translating 
9 
the Japanese term nyuujouryou (entrance fee). 
On the other hand, speakers consistently built a 
sentence around the word "fee" where a native 
speaker would use the pattern "how much does 
X cost" regardless of what Japanese term was 
used. 
3. Ask  how much admission costs 
How much is the fee for entrance? 
How much is fee for entering? 
How much is the fee for admission? 
Although it was the element of the task that 
the speakers liked the least, the handling of un- 
familiar expressions showed us how important i
was to prompt users with specific queries that 
they might not know how to express. In real- 
world use, an application would have to handle 
such utterances, but in a more free-form data 
collection scenario speakers might avoid asking 
such questions altogether. We included among 
the Japanese prompts expressions which have 
no obvious English equivalent in order to ob- 
serve how speakers expressed themselves when 
they did not know what the right English ex- 
pression would be. Speakers were very inventive 
and almost always cameup with an understand- 
able English utterance, as shown in Figure 1 
(displayed on the following page). 
? .~ .~y~ . . . . . .  
35O 
3OO 
250 
2OO 
150 
|CO 
SO 
o i i * i i 
Figure 2: Vocabulary growth for native and 
non-native speakers in the tourist information 
task. Corpus size is displayed on the x axis and 
vocabulary size is displayed on the y axis. 
5.2 Quantitative Analysis 
Figure 2 shows the vocabulary growth rate for 
native and non-native speakers in the tourist 
information task that was our domain for 
these experiments. Interestingly, the vocabu- 
lary growth seems to be faster for non-native 
10 
speakers than for native speakers. The curve 
for native speakers in another similar domain 
(travel arrangement) for which we have much 
more data was similar to the curve for native 
speakers hown in Fig. 2; in fact, the vocabu- 
lary size for this bigger corpus did not reach the 
size of the non-native corpus at 5600 words until 
10,000 word tokens had been seen. 
We also looked at trigram perplexity of the 
data collected in the different pilot experiments 
measured with respect o a model built on the 
large travel arrangement data set. Although the 
test corpora were very small, we found that the 
corpus collected from non-native speakers using 
English prompts was very similar in terms of 
perplexity to the corpus collected from native 
speakers in the tourist information task. Con- 
versely, the corpus collected from non-native 
speakers using Japanese prompts showed over 
1.5 times the perplexity of the native corpus. 
This indicates that the character of the two non- 
native corpora are quite different, and that in- 
corporating the Ll-prompted data in training 
a statistical anguage model will increase the 
predictive power of the model with respect o 
non-native speakers. 
6 D iscuss ion  
A final question is how many of our observa- 
tions are Ll-dependent. It is true that Japanese 
speakers how some common patterns in their 
speech and tend to be very self-conscious about 
speaking. Japanese is written with a non-roman 
script and this probably influences both com- 
prehension in the spontaneous tasks and read- 
ing accuracy in the read tasks. Japanese is very 
different from English grammatically, pragmat- 
ically, and phonotactically. Many of our obser- 
vations may not be consistent with observations 
in collection with native speakers of German, for 
example. In this respect, though, it is really an 
ideal case study for the purposes of uncovering 
all the stumbling blocks we may encounter when 
designing data collection for non-native speak- 
ers. We found that speakers' reading ability was 
generally much higher than their conversational 
ability; Byrne's study (1998) found that their 
lowest skill level speakers had some conversa- 
tional ability but no reading ability. The im- 
portant thing to recognize is that the reading 
level - speaking level correspondence is among 
the variables that should be evaluated in order 
what_sort_of appearance with go should QuEs 
What should I wear? 
Do we need to wear the formal dress or we can wear the casual one? 
What kind of clothes do I have to wear for there? 
In .what kind of dresses hould I go there? 
Should I oh should I go formal with formal style? 
What should I wear to go there? 
bus/boat/train etc. GEN last_trip GEN time 
What time is the last return train/bus/ferry? 
What time is the last train to go back to my house? 
What time is the last transportation from there? 
Do you know what time is the last bus ships or trains to return? 
When does the final bus or ship or train? 
What time is the final bus? 
child discount 
Is there a children's discount? 
Is there any discount for the for child 
Do they have a discount for children 
When I buy the ticket for children are there any discount 
Is there special children cost 
How much is the fee for children 
Figure 1: Inventive expressions. The Japanese prompt and an English gloss are shown with a 
sample English response at the top of each series. 
to design an effective data collection protocol. 
Re ferences  
Greg Aist et al 1998. How Effective is Un- 
supervised Data Collection for Children's 
Speech Recognition? In Proceedings of IC- 
SLP. 
Charles Briggs. 1986. Learning How to Ask: A 
Sociolinguistic Appraisal of the Role of the 
Interview in Social Science Research. Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge. 
William Byrne et al 1998. Is Automatic Speech 
Recognition Ready for Non-Native Speech? 
A Data Collection Effort and Initial Exper- 
iments in Modeling Conversational Hispanic 
English. In Proceedings of Speech Technology 
in Language Learning (STILL). 
Maxine Eskenazi. 1997. Detection of Foreign 
Speakers' Pronunciation Errors for Second 
Language Training- Preliminary Results. In 
Proceedings of Eurospeech. 
Gob Kawai and Keikichi Hirose. 1997. A CALL 
System Using Speech Recognition to Train 
the Pronunciation of Japanese Long Vowels, 
the mora nasal and mora obstruents. In Pro- 
ceedings of Eurospeech, Rhodes. 
William Labov. 1984. Field methods of the 
project on linguistic change and variation. In 
Language in Use: Readings in Sociolinguis- 
tics, pages 28 - 66. Prentice-Hall. 
Leonardo Neumeyer, Horacio Franco, Mitchel 
Weintraug, and Patti Price. 1998. Automatic 
Text-independent Pronunciation Scoring of 
Foreign Language Student Speech. In Pro- 
ceedings of ICSLP. 
Silke Witt and Steve Young. 1997. Language 
Learning Based on Non-Native Speech Recog- 
nition. In Proceedings of Eurospeech, Rhodes. 
Nessa Wolfson. 1976. Speech Events and Natu- 
ral Speech: Some Implications for Sociolin- 
guistic Methodology. Language in Society, 
5:188 - 209. 
11 
