Automated Essay Scoring for Nonnative English Speakers 
Jill Burstein 
Educational Testing Service 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540 
jburstein@ets.org 
Martin Chodorow 
Hunter College, CUNY 
New York, New York  
martin.chodorow@hunter.cuny.edu 
Abstract 
The e-rater system TM ~ is an operational 
automated essay scoring system, developed 
at Educational Testing Service (ETS). The 
average agreement between human readers, 
and between independent human readers 
and e-rater is approximately 92%. There is 
much interest in the larger writing 
community in examining the system's 
performance on nonnative speaker essays. 
This paper focuses on results of a study that 
show e-rater's performance on Test of 
Written English (TWE) essay responses 
written by nonnative English speakers 
whose native language is Chinese, Arabic, 
or Spanish. In addition, one small sample of 
the data is from US-born English speakers, 
and another is from non-US-born candidates 
who report that their native language is 
English. As expected, significant 
differences were found among the scores of 
the English groups and the nonnative 
speakers. While there were also differences 
between e-rater and the human readers for 
the various language groups, the average 
agreement rate was as high as operational 
agreement. At least four of the five features 
that are included in e-rater's current 
operational models (including discourse, 
topical, and syntactic features) also appear 
in the TWE models. This suggests that the 
features generalize well over a wide range 
of linguistic variation, as e-rater was not 
1 The e-rater system TM is a trademark of 
Educational Testing Service. In the paper, we 
will refer to the e-rater system TM as e-rater. 
confounded by non-standard English 
syntactic structures or stylistic discourse 
structures which one might expect to be a 
problem for a system designed to evaluate 
native speaker writing. 
Introduction 
Research and development in automated 
essay scoring has begun to flourish in the 
past five years or so, bringing about a whole 
new field of interest to the NLP community 
(Burstein, et al(1998a, 1998b and 1998c), 
Foltz, et al(1998), Larkey (1998), Page and 
Peterson (1995)). Research at Educational 
Testing Service (ETS) has led to the recent 
development of e-rater, an operational 
automated essay scoring system. E-rater is 
based on features in holistic scoring guides 
for human reader scoring. Scoring guides 
have a 6-point score scale. Six's are 
assigned to the "best" essays, and "l 's" to 
the least well-written. Scoring guide criteria 
are based on structural (syntax and 
discourse) and vocabulary usage in essay 
responses ( ee http://www.gmat.org). 
E-rater builds new models for each topic 
(prompt-specific models) by evaluating 
approximately 52 syntactic, discourse and 
topical analysis variables for 270 human 
reader scored training essays. Relevant 
features for each model are based on the 
predictive feature set identified by a 
stepwise linear regression. In operational 
scoring, when compared to a human reader, 
68 
e-rater assigns an exactly matching or 
adjacent score (on the 6-point scale) about 
92% of the time. This is the same as the 
agreement rate typically found between two 
human readers. Correlations between e- 
rater scores and those of a single human 
reader are about .73; correlations between 
two human readers are .75. 
The scoring guide criteria assume standard 
written English. Non-standard English may 
show up in the writing of native English 
speakers of non-standard ialects. For 
general NLP research purposes, it is useful 
to have computer-based corpora that 
represent language variation (Biber (1993)). 
Such corpora llow us to explore issues with 
regard to how the system will handle 
responses that might be written in non- 
standard English. Current research at ETS 
for the Graduate Record Examination 
(GRE) (Burstein, et al 1999) is making use 
of essay corpora that represent subgroups 
where variations in standard written English 
might be found, such as in the writing of 
African Americans, Latinos and Asians 
(Breland, et al(1995) and Bridgeman and 
McHale (1996)). In addition, ETS is 
accumulating essay corpora of nonnative 
speakers that can be used for research. 
This paper focuses on preliminary data that 
show e-rater's performance on Test of 
Written English (TWE) essay responses 
written by nonnative English speakers 
whose native language is Chinese, Arabic, 
or Spanish. A small sample of the data is 
from US-born English speakers and a 
second small sample is from non-US-born 
candidates who report that their native 
language is English. The data were 
originally collected for a study by Frase, et 
al (1997) in which analyses of the essays are 
also discussed. The current work is only the 
beginning of a program of research at ETS 
that will examine automated scoring for 
nonnative English speakers. Overall goals 
include determining how features used in 
automated scoring may also be used to (a) 
examine the difficulty of an essay question 
for speakers of particular language groups, 
and (b) automatically formulate diagnostics 
and instruction for nonnative English 
speakers, with customization for different 
language groups. 
1. E-rater Feature Identification, 
Model Building and Scoring 
The driving concept that underlies e-rater is 
that it needs to evaluate the same kinds of 
features that human readers do. This is why 
from the beginning of its development, we 
made it a priority to use features from the 
scoring guide and to eliminate any direct 
measures of essay length. Even though 
length measures can be shown to be highly 
correlated with human reader essay scores, 
length variables are not scoring guide 
criteria (Page and Peterson, 1995). The 
features currently used by the system are 
syntactic features, discourse cue words, 
terms and structures, and topical analysis, 
specifically, vocabulary usage at the level of 
the essay (big bag of words) and at the level 
of the argument. Argument, in this case, 
refers generally to the different discussion 
points made by the writer. 
1.1 Syntactic Structure and Syntactic 
Variety 
The holistic rubric criteria specify that the 
syntactic variety used by a candidate should 
be considered with regard to essay score. 
The e-rater system uses an ETS-enhanced 
version of the CASS syntactic chunker 
(Abney (1996)), referred to here as the 
parser. The parser identifies several 
syntactic structures in the essay responses, 
such as subjunctive auxiliary verbs (e.g., 
would, should, might), and complex clausal 
structures, such as complement, infinitive, 
and subordinate clauses. Recognition of 
such features in an essay yields information 
about its syntactic variety. 
69 
1.2 Discourse Cues and Organization 
of Ideas 
Organization of ideas is another criterion 
that the scoring guide asks human readers to 
consider in assigning essay score. E-rater 
contains a lexicon based on the conceptual 
framework of conjunctive relations from 
Quirk, et al(1985) in which cue terms, such 
as "In summary" and "In conclusion," are 
classified as conjuncts used for 
summarizing. The conjunct classifiers 
contain information about whether or not 
the item is a kind of discourse development 
term (e.g., "for example" and "because"), or 
whether it is more likely to be used to begin 
a discourse statement (e.g., First, Second, or 
Third). E-rater also contains heuristics that 
define the syntactic or essay-based 
structures in which these terms must appear 
to be considered as discourse markers. For 
example, for the word "first" to be 
considered a discourse marker, it must not 
be a nominal modifier, as in the sentence, 
"The first time I went to Europe was in 
1982," in which "first" modifies the noun 
"time." Instead, "first" must occur as an 
adverbial conjunct to be considered a 
discourse marker, as in the sentence, "First, 
it has often been noted that length is highly 
correlated with essay score." The cue term 
lexicon and the associated heuristics are 
used by e-rater to automatically annotate a
high-level discourse structure of each essay. 
These annotations are also used by the 
system to partition each essay into separate 
arguments which are input to the system's 
topical analysis component, described 
below, for analyzing topical content. 
1.3 Topical Analysis and Vocabulary 
Usage 
Vocabulary usage is listed as another 
criterion on human reader scoring guides. 
Good essays are relevant to the assigned 
topic. They also tend to use a more 
specialized and precise vocabulary in 
discussing the topic than poorer essays do. 
We should therefore xpect a good essay to 
resemble other good essays in its choice of 
words and, conversely, a poor essay to 
resemble other poor ones. To capture use of 
vocabulary or identification of topic, e-rater 
uses content vector analyses that are based 
on the vector-space model commonly found 
in information retrieval applications. 
Training essays are converted into vectors 
of word frequencies, and the frequencies are 
then transformed into word weights) These 
weight vectors populate the training space. 
To score a test essay, it is converted into a 
weight vector, and a search is conducted to 
find the training vectors most similar to it, 
as measured by the cosine between the test 
and training vectors. The closest matches 
among the training set are used to assign a 
score to the test essay. 
E-rater uses two different forms of the 
general procedure sketched above. In one 
form, for looking at topical analysis at the 
essay level, each of the 270 training essays 
is represented by a separate vector in the 
training space. The score assigned to the test 
essay is a weighted mean of the scores for 
the 6 training essays whose vectors are 
closest o the vector of the test essay. This 
2 Word (or term) weight reflects not only a 
word's frequency in the essay but also its 
distribution across essays. E-rater's formula for 
the weight of word w in essay j is: 
weightwj=(freqw/maxfreqj) * log(nessays/essaysw) 
where freqwj is the frequency of word w in essay 
j, maxfreqi is the frequency of the most frequent 
word in essay j, nessays is the total number of 
training essays, and essaysw is the number of 
training essays that contain w. The first part of 
the formula measures the relative importance of 
the word in the essay. The second part gauges its 
specificity across essays, so that a word that 
appears in many essays will have a lower weight 
than one which appears in only a few. In the 
extreme case, a word that appears in all essays 
(e.g., "the") has a weight of 0. 
70 
score is computed using the following 
formula, rounded to the nearest integer: 
Score for test essay t = 
E(cosinetj * scorej)/~ cosinetj 
where j ranges over the 6 closest training 
essays, scorej is the human rater score for 
training essay j, and cosineg is the cosine 
between test essay t and training essayj. 
The other form of content vector analysis 
that the system uses combines all of the 
training essays for each score category and 
populates the training space with just 6 
"supervectors", one each for scores 1-6. 
This method is used to evaluate the 
vocabulary usage at the argument level. The 
test essay is evaluated one argument at a 
time. Each argument is converted into a 
vector of word weights and compared to the 
6 vectors in the training space. The closest 
vector is found and its score is assigned to 
the argument. This process continues until 
all the arguments have been assigned a 
score. The overall score for the test essay is 
an adjusted mean of the argument scores 
using the following formula, rounded to the 
nearest integer: 
Score for test essay t = 
(~argscorej + nargst)l(nargst + 1) 
where j ranges over the arguments in test 
essay t, argscorej is the score of argument j, 
and nargst is the number of arguments in t. 
Using this adjusted mean has the overall 
effect of reducing, slightly, the score for 
essays with few arguments, and of 
increasing somewhat he score of essays 
with many arguments. 
2. Model Building and Essay Scoring 
E-rater builds a new model for each test 
question (prompt). In pre-operational trials, 
a set of 270 essays scored by at least two 
human readers has been shown to be 
optimal for training. The distribution at each 
score point in the 270 training essays is as 
follows: five O's, fifteen l's, and fifty 2's 
through 6' s. 3 
The syntactic, discourse, and topical 
analysis features are identified for each of 
the 270 essays. Vectors of raw counts of 
occurrences of syntactic and discourse 
structure information, and scores generated 
for the two topical analysis components are 
submitted to a stepwise linear regression. 
For each prompt, the regression selects the 
subset of predictive features. Typically, 8 to 
12 features are selected. Although every 
model has a different combination of 
features, in the 75 models that we are 
currently running, the five most frequently 
occurring features are: 1) the topical 
analysis score by argument, 2) the topical 
analysis score by essay, 3) the number of 
subjunctive auxiliary words, 4) the ratio of 
subjunctive auxiliary words to total words 
in the essay, and 5) the total number of 
argument development terms. 
The coefficient weightings for each of the 
predictive features generated from the 
regression for each prompt are then used to 
score new essays for that prompt. 
3. E-rater Agreement Performance on 
Nonnative Speaker Data 
Some questions that will now be addressed 
in looking at e-rater system performance on 
nonnative speaker essay data are: (1) How 
does performance for nonnative speakers on 
TWE compare with performance in 
operational sconng? (2) How does the 
system's agreement with human readers 
differ for each of the language groups in this 
3 To date, this training sample composition has 
given us the best cross-validation results. Some 
previous studies experimenting with smaller 
training samples with this fairly flat distribution, 
or samples which reflect more directly the natural 
distribution of the data at each score point have 
shown lower performance in scoring cross- 
validation sets of 500 - 900 essays. 
71 
study? (3) How does e-rater 's  agreement 
with human readers differ for the nonnative 
speaker language groups as compared to the 
English speaking language groups? (4) Is 
there a significant difference between the 
features used most often in models for 
operational prompts as compared to the 
TWE prompts? 
3.1 Data sample 
For this study, two prompts from the Test of 
Written English were used. These prompts 
(TWE1 and TWE2) ask candidates to read 
and think about a statement, and then to 
agree or disagree with the statement, and to 
give reasons to support he opinion given by 
the candidate. The scoring guides for these 
essays have a 6-point scale, where a "6" is 
the highest score and a "1" is the lowest 
score. They are holistic guides, though the 
criteria are more generally stated than in the 
scoring guides used to build e-rater.  
For each of the prompts a total of 255 
essays were used for training. Fifty training 
essays were randomly selected from each of 
the score categories 2-6. Because of the 
small number of essays with a score of 1, 
only five l 's were included in each training 
set. The remainder of the essays were used 
for cross-validation purposes. 
4. Results 
Tables 1-3 show overall and language 
specific scoring results for TWE1 and 
TWE2 cross-validation data. The data are 
presented in terms of mean score and also as 
percent agreement between e-rater  and 
human readers, where agreement is defined 
as exactly matching or adjacent scores on 
the 6-point scale. In previous studies of 
holistically scored essays (Burstein, et al
(1998a, 1998b and 1998c)), we have 
examined e-rater 's  agreement with two 
individual human readers. For these TWE 
data, only a final human reader score 
(labeled GDF in the Tables) was available. 
The final score reflects the average of two 
or three human reader scores. A third 
human reader is typically used if the first 
two humans disagree by more that a single 
point. For the operational essay data, the 
mean agreement between e-rater  and the 
final human reader score is 90%, about the 
same as the mean agreement between two 
individual human readers at about 92%. 4 
For the same data, Pearson correlations 
between e-rater  and final human reader 
scores, and between two human readers are 
about the same at .75. Table 1 shows that, 
for TWE essays, overall e-rater  agreement 
with the human reader final score is high. 
The values are comparable to those for the 
operational essays although the correlations 
are somewhat lower. 
4 Baseline agreement for the TWE data is 
approximately 84%. This is determined by 
calculating agreement if he most common score, 
"4", is assigned to all essays. Using the same 
technique for GMAT essays howed baseline 
agreement to be about 83%. 
72 
Table 1: Comparison of Human Readers Final Score (GDF) & e-rater Score (E) Over All 
Language Groups in TWE1 and TWE2 
Prompt n= 
TWE1 562 
TWE2 576 
Mean 
%Agreement Pearson r GDF E 
(Exact+AdJacent) Score Score 
Mean S.D. Mean S.D. 
91.1 .667 4.16 .974 4.08 1.041 
93.4 .718 4.16 .936 4.07 .989 
92.3 .693 4.16 .955 4.08 1.015 
An analysis of variance was performed on 
the essay scores, using Reader (GDF, E) as 
a within factor and Prompt (TWE1, TWE2) 
and Language Group as between factors. 
Although small, the difference in mean 
score between GDF 
and e-rater was statistically significant 
(F(1,u28) = 5.469, p < .05). There was no 
significant main effect for Prompt, and no 
interactions between Prompt and the other 
factors. Tables 2 and 3 show the results for 
TWE1 and TWE2 by Language Group and 
Reader. 
Table 2: Comparison of Human Readers Final Score (GDF) & e.rater Score (E) By 
Language Groups in TWE1 
Language 
Group 
Arabic 
Chinese 
Spanish 
US-English 
Non-US 
English 
r l=  
146 
153 
131 
97 
35 
%Agreement 
(Exact+Adjacent) 
Pearson r GDF 
Score 
E 
Score 
Mean S.D. Mean S.D. 
89.0 .645 3.83 .973 3.67 .947 
88.2 .543 4.09 .884 4.12 1.00 
92.4 .644 3.96 .986 3.70 .915 
96.9 .632 4.96 .624 4.93 .814 
91.4 .544 4.31 .900 4.51 .981 
Table 3: Comparison of Human Readers Final Score (GDF) & e.rater Score (E) By 
Language Groups in TWE2 
Language 
Group 
Arabic 
Chinese 
Spanish 
US-English 
Non-US 
English 
n = %Agreement 
(Exact+Adjacent) 
151 96.4 
139 91..0 
138 93.5 
103 92.0 
45 93.3 
Pearson r 
.783 
.707 
.616 
.519 
.465 
GDF E 
Score Score 
Mean S.D. Mean S.D. 
3.85 .959 3.70 .909 
3.92 .957 4.04 1.03 
4.07 .845 3.69 .733 
4.83 .613 4.95 .759 
4.68 .732 4.60 .780 
The main effect for Language Group was 
significant (F(4,1128) = 76.561, p < .001). As 
expected, the two English groups scored 
substantially higher than the nonnative 
speakers. Finally, the interaction of 
Language Group by Reader was also 
73 
significant (F(4,H28) = 12.397, p < .001), 
reflecting higher scores for GDF than for e- 
rater in some groups (e.g., Spanish) and 
lower scores for GDF than for e-rater in 
others (e.g., Chinese). 
Despite the score differences, Z2 analyses 
showed no significant differences on the 
Agreement measure for Language Group in 
either TWE1 Or TWE2. There-was however 
an effect of Prompt in the analysis of 
Agreement for Arabic speakers, where 
Agreement levels in TWE1 and TWE2 were 
significantly different (Z2(1) = 6.607, p < 
.01); no other group differences in 
Agreement were found between the two 
prompts. 
5. Discussion and Conclusions 
In this study we have evaluated the 
performance and effects of e-rater on two 
sets of nonnative speaker essay responses, 
approximately 1100 essays. The results 
show that overall system performance is 
quite good and highly comparable to results 
for scoring the primarily native speaker data 
found in operational essays. The models that 
e-rater built to score TWE1 and TWE2 
contain 7 or 8 features, and these include 
syntactic, discourse and topical analysis 
features. Importantly, at least 4 of the top 5 
features that are included in the current 
operational models also appear in the 
models for TWE1 and TWE2. It is useful to 
know that even when 75% of essays used 
for model building were written by 
nonnative English speakers (as in this 
study), the features selected by the 
regression procedure were largely the same 
as those in models based on operational 
writing samples in which the majority of the 
sample were native English speakers. This 
suggests that the features that the system 
considers are generalizable from native 
speaker writing to nonnative speaker 
writing. Further, e-rater was not 
confounded by non-standard English 
syntactic structures or stylistic discourse 
structures, which one might expect o be a 
problem for a system designed to evaluate 
native speaker writing. 
Although there were significant differences 
between final human reader score and e- 
rater score across language groups, in 
absolute terms the differences were small 
(only a fraction of a score point) and did not 
produce significant differences in 
agreement. For one group, prompt made a 
difference. It would be useful to analyze the 
essays in more detail to see what features 
are responsible for the score variations and 
how essay topic might explain any 
differences due to prompt. We are currently 
investigating the use of tree-based 
regression models to supplement linear 
regression (Sheehan, 1997). Preliminary 
analyses of tree-based regressions, however, 
do not show an improvement in e-rater 
performance. This may be explained by the 
fact that the most predictive features in e- 
rater are linearly related to score. 
In future studies, we will have sufficient 
data to build individual models for different 
language groups to examine how this affects 
e-rater's performance. In addition, we hope 
to learn about how building language- 
specific models can be used for automated 
generation of diagnostic and instructional 
feedback -- perhaps customized for different 
language groups. 
References 
Abney, Steven. (1996) Part-of-speech 
tagging and partial parsing. In Church, 
Young and Bloothooft (eds), Corpus-based 
Methods in Language and Speech. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
Biber, D. (1993) Using register-diversified 
corpora for general language studies. 
Computational Linguistics, 19, 219-241. 
Breland, Bonner and Kubota (1995), Factors 
in Performance on Brief, Impromptu Essay 
74 
Examinations, College Board Report No. 
95 -4. 
Bridgeman and McHale (1996). Gender and 
Ethnic Group Differences on the GMAT 
Analytical Writing Assessment. ETS RR- 
96-2. 
Burstein, Jill, Karen Kukich, Susanne 
Wolff, Chi Lu, Martin Chodorow, Lisa 
Braden-Harder, and Mary Dee Harris 
(1998). Automated Scoring Using A Hybrid 
Feature Identification Technique. In the 
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the 
AsSociation of Computational Linguistics, 
August, 1998. Montreal, Canada. 
Burstein, Jill, Karen Kukich, Susanne 
Wolff, Chi Lu, & Martin Chodorow (1998). 
Enriching Automated Scoring Using 
Discourse Marking. In the Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Discourse Relations & 
Discourse Marking, Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Computational Linguistics, 
August, 1998. Montreal, Canada. 
Burstein, Jill C., Lisa Braden-Harder, 
Martin Chodorow, Shuyi Hua, Bruce 
Kaplan, Karen Kukich, Chi Lu, James 
Nolan, Don Rock and Susanne Wolff 
(1998). Computer Analysis of Essay 
Content for Automated Score Prediction. 
ETS RR 98-15. 
Foltz, P. W., W. Kintsch, and T. K. 
Landauer. (1998). The Measurement of 
Textual Coherence with Latent Semantic 
Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25(2&3), 
285-307. 
Frase, L. T., Faletti, J., Ginther, A., & 
Grant, L. (1997). Computer Analysis of the 
TOEFL Test of Written English (TWE). 
Educational Testing Service, Princeton, NJ. 
Larkey, L. (1998). Automatic Essay Grading 
Using Text Categorization Techniques. 
Proceedings of the 21 st A CM-SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development 
in Information Retrieval, Melbourne, 
Australia, 90-95. 
Page, E. B. and N. Petersen. (1995). The 
computer moves into essay grading: 
updating the ancient test. Phi Delta Kappan. 
March, 561-565. 
Sheehan, K (1997). A Tree-Based Approach 
to Proficiency Scaling and Diagnostic 
Assessment. Journal of Educational 
Measurement. 34(4), 333-352. 
Acknowledgements 
We owe considerable thanks to Karen 
Kukich, who designed the architecture for 
the operational version of e-rater, and who 
led the team at ETS that refined and 
implemented the production version of the 
system. The production version makes the 
process of continued research in automated 
scoring much smoother. Thanks to Susanne 
Wolff for her invaluable collaboration on 
the e-rater system from its inception. We 
are also grateful to Steve Abney for 
allowing us to use CASS in the operational 
version of e-rater; to Claudia Leacock for 
leading the design and development effort to 
create the ETS-enhanced version of CASS; 
to Thomas Morton and Hoa Trang Dang for 
the implementation of the ETS-enhanced 
version of CASS; and to Daniel Zuckerman, 
who made it possible to run CASS on both 
Unix and NT platforms. We thank Chi Lu 
for implementations and re-implementations 
of statistical programming embedded in e- 
rater, and Magdalena Wolska for the work 
she did implementing tools that allowed us 
to conduct his study with ease. Finally, we 
are grateful to ETS test developers for all of 
the dialogue that has helped us understand 
the educational direction of automated essay 
scoring, and all the people at ETS and 
GMAC who supported this research from its 
inception. 
75 
