Dual Use of Linguistic Resources: 
Evaluation of MT Systems and Language Learners 
Lisa Decrozant 
University of Maryland and 
Army Research Laboratory 
AMSRL-IS-CI 
2800 Powder Mill Road 
Adelphi, USA 20852 
decrozan@arl.mil 
Clare R. Voss 
Army Research Laboratory 
AMSRL-IS-CI 
2800 Powder Mill Road 
Adelphi, USA 20852 
voss@arl.mil 
Introduction 
Human translators working with 
"embedded machine translation (MT) 
systems"1 on the task of filtering text 
documents in a foreign language often 
have limited training in the foreign 
language they encounter. For our MT 
system users who are also language 
learners, we are developing a suite of 
linguistic tools that enable them, on the 
same laptop platform, to perform their 
foreign language filtering tasks using a 
combination of Optical Character 
Recognition (OCR), Machine Translation 
(MT), Information Retrieval (IR) and 
language sustainment tools. 2 Thus we 
have begun constructing linguistic test 
suites that can serve the dual needs we 
have for the evaluation of MT systems and 
language learning. 3 
In this paper, we present our pilot work 
(i) defining and constructing a semantic 
domain of spatial expressions as a test 
suite, (ii) testing our MT system on the 
~The term embedded MT system, adopted from 
Voss and Reeder (1998), refers to a computer 
system with several software components, 
including an MT engine. 
2 We are creating a single interface for the MT 
system and the language sustainment tools that 
enables users to guide their own learning during 
MT-aided tasks, such as filtering, in contrast to 
single-purpose tutoring systems (e.g., Holland et 
al., 1995) 
3 For others addressing multiple uses of linguistic 
resources, see NLP-IA (1998). 
translations of these expressions, and (iii) 
testing language learners' ability to 
translate these expressions. Our results 
show that, for English-to-French 
translation of a small set of spatial 
expressions, neither acommercially viable 
MT system nor intermediate-level students 
are adequately trained to identify explicit 
and implicit (ambiguous) paths of motion. 
1. Identifying Linguistic Issues for 
Evaluation 
English and French are known to 
"diverge" 4in their expression of spatial 
relations: that is, given a spatial expression 
in one of these languages, the process of 
translating it will fail if a simple word-for- 
word replacement strategy is used, 
whether translated by an MT system or by 
language learners. 
1.1 Directional Particles & Prepositions 
Klipple (1992) documents a divergence 
between English and French in the 
semantics of direction. In English, 
directional particles, such as up and down, 
may appear following a verb of motion, 
giving the verb's event a directed motion 
reading. In French, however, there are no 
equivalent lexical items corresponding to
these English directional particles. Instead, 
the semantics of direction is expressed 
elsewhere. Klipple also observes more 
generally, following Talmy (1983), that 
4 We use the term divergence as in Dorr (1994). 
32 
directions are typically incorporated 
within the French motion verb. Example 1 
below shows one such case, where the 
English verb-plus-preposition went up 
translates into the French verb est montd 
without a preposition. 
1. E: 5 The child went up the stairs. 
F: L'enfant est mont6 l'escalier. 
g: The child ascended the stairs. 
1.2 Loeational Prepositions 
English and French also diverge in their 
expression of spatial relations with respect 
to a second group of prepositions. As 
noted by Jackendoff (1983), English 
locational (or Place-type) prepositions 
may be ambiguous because they may also 
have a directional (or Path-type) reading. 6 
For example, sentence 2 below, is 
ambiguous in English. In the 2a reading, 
the bottle moves along a path as it floats, 
starting away from the bridge and ending 
up under the bridge. In the 2b reading, the 
bottle remains under the bridge as it floats: 
no path is specified, only the general 
location where the floating took place. In 
French, however, the equivalent 
preposition typically has only the 2b 
locational reading, not the 2a directional 
reading. 
2. E: The bottle floated under the bridge. 
2a. p: the bottle floated to a place under the bridge. 
2b. p: the bottle floated while under the bridge. 
F: La bouteille a flott6 sous le pont. (sense 2b) 
g: The bottle floated under the bridge. 
We selected the domain of spatial 
expressions for evaluation in part because, 
as example 3 shows, the ambiguity of 
English spatial prepositions may 
significantly interfere with the task of 
accurate message understanding--whether 
by MT systems or second language 
learners. As Taylor and White (1998) 
point out, in a real-world, task-based 
evaluation of MT systems or language 
learners, the measure of interest is the 
correct and incorrect consequences of our 
users' actions based on their understanding 
of a foreign language text document. Such 
measures of effectiveness are difficult to 
obtain, and researchers, outside of the 
field, must rely instead on linguistically 
based measures of performance. Thus, our 
approach as been to build our test suite 
relying on extensive pre-existing, 
linguistically motivated spatial anguage 
research (e.g., Bloom et al, 1996, 
Herskovits, 1986; Jackendoff, 1983; 
Lindstromberg, 1998; Olivier and Gapp, 
1998; Vandeloise, 1992). 
Example 3 is a linguistically simple 
variation on example 2: both have manner 
of motion verbs (float, march) and 
locational prepositions (under, in). In each 
case, the prepositional phrase (PP) may be 
an argument to the verb (the 2a and 3a 
paraphrases) or an adjunct (the 2b and 3b 
paraphrases). Notice that, if the exact 
location of the troops were mission-critical 
information, this ambiguity should not go 
undetected. In one case, the troops have 
changed locations by moving into the 
canyon, while in the other, the troops are 
remaining in the canyon. 
5 In the examples, E = English, F = French, 
g = Gloss (word-for-word eplacement), 
~= paraphrase 
In a pilot study, three native English speakers 
whom we tested consistently identified 35 
locational prepositions in English with this form 
of ambiguity. 
3. E: The troops marched in the canyon. 
3a. p: The troops entered the canyon marching. 
3b. p: The troops were marching about 
in the canyon. 
33 
2. Developing Linguistic 
Resources for Evaluation 
In order to assess how accurately and 
consistently MT systems handle spatial 
language and how effectively second 
language learners are being taught about 
spatial language, we followed these steps 
in constructing a spatial expressions 
evaluation dataset. We first built a master 
list of English prepositions from several 
sources (Lindstromberg, 1998; Websters, 
website) and then created asublist of only 
spatial prepositions, based on the 
judgments of three native English 
speakers, two of whom were linguistically 
trained and one who was not. 
Second, we constructed English 
sentences where the spatial PP was 
systematically composed into different 
syntactic positions, as shown in Figure 1. 
This enabled us to examine the range of 
Path/Place-type ambiguity in the resulting 
spatial expressions. The spatial 
prepositions were placed in contexts where 
only one place or path interpretation was 
feasible, as well as in contexts where the 
reading was ambiguous. For example, 
PP's with the preposition across were 
composed in (i) a verb's subcategorized 
argument for the verbs live and dance, as 
in 'he lived/danced \[PP across the street\]', 
(ii) as a verb's non-subcategorized 
argument for the verbs scare and sneeze, 
as in 'he scared the child \[PP across the 
street\]' and 'he sneezed the cards \[PP 
across the table\]', and (iii) as an adjunct 
outside the VP for the verb eat, as in 'he 
ate dinner \[PP across the street\]'. 
subcat Arg - nonsubcat Arg adjunct 
"He lives "He sneezed the "He ate 
across the cards across the dinner 
street." table." across the 
"He danced "He scared the child street." 
across the street." across the street." 
F igure 1, a row of ESE data set, with preposition across  
Once this English Spatial Expression 
(ESE) dataset was constructed, our third 
step was to elicit translations of a subset of 
these sentences into French. Our 
translator was a native French speaker, 
fluent in English, with a PhD in linguistics 
from a university in the U.S. Our 
translator's extensive training in 
linguistics made it possible for us to be 
quite specific about he English 
ambiguities present in the sentences that 
we needed him to translate. 
Our efforts have yielded the following 
datasets: an English preposition list, an 
English spatial preposition list, a dataset of 
English spatial expressions sorted by their 
spatial preposition and syntactic structure, 
and a dataset of high-quality French 
translations of a proper subset of the ESE 
dataset. 
3. Using Linguistic Resources to 
Evaluate an MT System 
One of the objectives of our work is to 
support users of the embedded MT 
systems that our laboratory has been 
involved in developing. These systems 
were designed to be 'good enough' for 
filtering or relevance analysis of hard- 
copy, open-source t xt documents. 7 The 
ESE dataset was developed as part of an 
ongoing effort to expand our evaluation 
test suites. Here we report on a 
preliminary test that explored the 
feasibility of using sentences from the 
ESE dataset with their human translation 
into French, to evaluate one MT engine 
that we know is being used in the field. 
Eight Sentences from the ESE dataset 
were selected and run through the MT 
engine from English to French. The 
results of these automatic translations were 
then compared to the human translator's 
7 Church and Hovy (1993) spelled out this notion 
of 'good enough' MT, and Resnik (1997) has 
introduced a clever method to test his. 
34 
translations. Two groups of prepositions, 
corresponding to the two types of 
divergences discussed above, were of 
interest to us. 
3.1 Default Place Readings 
First, we were curious about how 
ambiguous path/place r adings were 
handled, given that the MT engine we 
were working with was designed to 
produce only one preferred translation per 
input sentence, as is common for 
commercial MT products. We predicted 
that only the place reading would appear 
in the French MT results. We knew from 
discussions with MT developers that they 
rely heavily on hand-coded dictionaries in
creating their on-line lexicons. Since 
English and English-French dictionaries 
list locational prepositions, uch as those 
in examples 2 and 3, with only a place 
reading, not a path reading, it seemed most 
likely that only the place reading would 
appear in the French MT results. 
Another eason we expected place 
readings for the ambiguous phrases was 
that they are the direct result of the 
shortest path through an MT system, that 
is, via simple word replacements. Our 
predictions proved correct. Five sentences 
were ambiguous with both place and path 
readings, but all received only a place 
reading in the MT translations: 
Test Sentences MT Output 
1. He danced behind 1.11 a dans6 derriere l'6eran. 
the screen. 
2. He carried his luggage 2. I1 a port6 son bagage dans 
in the airplane, l'avion. 
3. He carried his luggage 3. I1 a port6 son bagage ~t 
inside the restaurant, l'int6fieur du restaurant. 
4. He jumped on the bed. 4. I1 a saut6 sur le lit. 
5. They danced in the 5. lls ont darts6 dans la 
room. chambre. 
These results led us to predict hat in our 
sentence 'The troops marched in the 
canyon', the MT engine would produce 
only the translation that meant he troops 
were marching while remaining in the 
canyon. This was indeed what the engine 
produced when we tested it. 
3.2 True Path Readings 
Second, we wanted to see what 
happened to the unambiguous path 
readings, given that the MT engine needed 
only a lexical pattern recognition to detect 
the English verb-preposition combination 
and then follow the well-documented 
conversion to French (Dorr, 1994). As 
shown in example 4, the English spatial 
semantics i redistributed: the manner of 
motion in the main verb is moved out to an 
adjunct in the French (en marchant), while 
the motion of going into the canyon is 
lexicalized in the main French verb and 
preposition (entrer and dans). 
4. E: The  t roops  marched i n to  the canyon.  
F: Les  so ldats  sont  entr6s dans  la gorge  en 
marchant .  
g: The t roops  entered  in the canyon march ing .  
We suspected however that the 
unambiguous path readings might not be 
properly detected, given the English- 
French divergence with respect to 
directional particles and prepositions 
discussed above. The results are given 
below: 
Test Sentences 
1. He carried his luggage 
across the street. 
2. He climbed own the 
mountain. 
3. The woman jumped out 
of the cake. 
MT Output 
1. II a port6 son bagage ~t 
travers la rue. 
2. I1 s'est 61ev6 en bas de la 
montagne. 
3. La femme a saut6 du 
g~.teau, s 
Our suspicions were correct; the MT 
engine did not correctly translate the three 
unambiguous path-only readings we 
8 Although technically correct, his translation is 
the result of a "simple word replacement" 
strategy on the part of the MT system, and not a 
sophisticated ranslation using semantic 
interpretation. 
35 
tested. Surprisingly, the actual MT- 
generated translations failed to capture 
any path interpretation at all. Example 5 
below shows that the MT system again 
produced the direct result of the shortest 
path through an MT system, with simple 
word replacements. Since the English into 
translated todans, the overall result was 
incorrect: he translation produced the 
unambiguous French place-only reading. 
5. E: The troops marched into the canyon. 
MT-F output: 
Les soldats ont march6 dans la gorge. 
g: The troops marched in the canyon. 
The results of the MT experiment allow us 
to conclude that for 'true-path' pattern 
sentences, the MT system will most likely 
fail to output an accurate translation. 
Our predictions for the behavior of the 
MT engine on the first group of 
prepositions proved correct. On the second 
group of prepositions, we predicted 
accurately that the MT engine would not 
produce the correct ranslation; however, 
we failed to predict he specific 
translations that were output. The MT 
engine that we are working with allows 
users to create their own lexicon entries 
that supercede those of the built-in 
general-purpose system lexicon. Our next 
steps will be to test other prepositions and 
to examine how the lexicon entries we 
create will alter the translations. 
4. Using Linguistic Resources to 
Evaluate Language Learners 
We are interested in the idea that 
learners can benefit from viewing parallel 
sentence-aligned t xt, as has been 
explored for cross-training ofFrench 
speakers learning Haitian Creole (Rincher, 
1986). We would expect hat divergences 
are readily understood by language 
learners when presented with parallel text. 
Our first step, however, before exploring 
this possibility for teaching, has been to 
use the ESE dataset to evaluate second 
language l arners to determine if they 
encounter the problems with spatial 
language that the MT system did. 
Fourteen intermediate-level French 
language l arners were given the same 
sentences from the data set used in the MT 
pilot experiment and were asked to 
translate into French. They were told 
explicitly that some of the sentences might 
be ambiguous. They were also given a 
spatial expression that was ambiguous as 
an example and the two interpretations of 
that expression were explained with 
paraphrases. 
Student True-Path Default-Place 
#1 1/3 0/5 
#2 1/3 015 
#3 1/3 0/5 
#4 1/3 3/5 
#5 1/3 2/5 
#6 1/3 0/5 
#7 013 4/5 
#8 0/3 0/5 
#9 2/3 2/5 
#10 1/3 2/5 
#11 1/3 2/5 
#12 2/3 2/5 
#13 1/3 5/5 
#14 1/3 515 
Because their level of French was not 
high, the college students were not always 
aware of the divergence in the expression 
of spatial paths. When faced with 
unambiguous path sentences ("true path" 
column in data table), the majority gave a 
simple word replacement translation, just 
as we had found in the MT system output. 
None of the students were able to correctly 
translate all three test sentences. 
In contrast to this, when translating into 
French the English sentences with default 
place-type prepositions ("default place" 
column in data table), a few students were 
able to consistently incorporate he spatial 
meaning of the English preposition i to 
the French verb and properly disambiguate 
36 
the test sentences. Nonetheless, these 
students were not able to use this 
knowledge in their translations of the "true 
path" sentences. 
This pilot experiment has given us a 
preliminary look at learners' 
understanding of cross-linguistic 
divergences in spatial expressions. 
Further testing of this domain with other 
sentences and with more advanced 
students i still needed. 
Conclusions 
We have developed a test suite of 
spatial expressions as part of our ongoing 
support work evaluating the embedded 
MT system prototypes and the language 
sustainment tools being developed in- 
house. The French language xamples 
discussed above show how problematic 
the domain of spatial language is for both 
MT and for language l arners. 
Acknowledgements 
Special thanks to Dr. Herv6 
Campangne's class: French 303, 
Practicum in Translation II, University 
of Maryland, College Park. 
References 
Bloom P. et al, editors (1996) Language 
and Space. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 
597 pp. 
Church, K. and Hovy, E. (1993) Good 
Applications for Crummy Machine 
Translation. Machine Translation, 8, 
239-258. 
Dorr, B. (1994) Machine Translation 
Divergences: A Formal Description and 
Proposed Solution, Computational 
Linguistics, 20(4), 597--633. 
Herskovits, A. (1986) Language and 
Spatial Cognition. Cambridge 
University Press, England. 
Holland, M. et al (1995) Intelligent 
Language Tutors: Theory Shaping 
Technology. Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc., 
Mahwah, NJ. 
Jackendoff, R. (1983) Semantics and 
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Klipple, E. (1997) Prepositions and 
Variation. In Di Sciullo (ed.) Projections 
and Interface Conditions, Oxford U. Press, 
NY, pp. 74-108. 
Lindstromberg, S. (1998) English Prepositions 
Explained. John Benjamins Publishing Co., 
Philadelphia, PA. 
NLP+IA (1998) Proceedings of the Natural 
Language Processing and Industrial 
Applications Conference, Moncton, New 
Brunswick, Canada. 
Decrozant, L. and Voss, C.R. Cross-Linguistic 
Resources for MT Evaluation and Language 
Training 
Dfaz de Ilarraza, A. et al Integration of NLP tools in 
an Intelligent Computer-Assisted Language Learning 
Environment for Basque: IDAZKIDE" 
Moghrabi, C. Preliminary Study for Minori-Fra, A 
Software for Teaching French in a Minority Setting. 
Olivier, P. and Gapp, K-P, eds. (1998) 
Representation a d Processing of Spatial 
Expressions. LEA Publishers, Mahwah, NJ. 
Resnik, P. (1997) Evaluating Multilingual 
Gisting of Web Pages. In Working Notes 
of the AAAI Spring Symposium on 
Natural Language Processing for 
the WWW, Palo Alto, CA. 
Rincher, D. (1986) Franse ak Angle San 
Traka e San Dlo Nan Je: Nou Pr" al 
Potoprens. Rincher and Associates, 
Forest Hills, NY 
Talmy, L. (1985) Lexicalization Patterns: 
Semantic Structure in Lexical Forms. In 
T. Shopen (ed.) Language Typology & 
Syntactic Description. Cambridge U. Press 
England, pp. 57-149. 
37 
Taylor, K. and White, J. (1998) Predicting 
What MT is Good for: User Judgements and 
Task Performance. In Proceedings ofthe 
Conference of the Association for Machine 
Translation i  the Americas (AMTA-98). 
Langhorne, PA. 
Vandeloise, C. ( 1991) Spatial Prepositions. 
U. of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL 
Websters, http://www.mw.com 
Voss, C.R. and Reeder, F. eds. (1998) 
Workshop on Embedded MT Systems: 
Design, Construction and Evaluation of 
Systems with an MT Component. Held in 
conjunction with of the Conference of the 
Association for Machine Translation i  the 
Americas (AMTA-98). Langhorne, PA 
38 
