Tagging of Speech Acts and Dialogue Games in 
Spanish Call Home 
Lori Levin, Klaus Ries, Ann Thym6-Gobbel, Alon Lavie 
Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Internet: ls l?cs, cmu.edu 
Abstract 
The Clarity project is devoted to automatic de- 
tection and classification of discourse structures in 
casual, non-task-oriented conversation using shal- 
low, corpus-based methods of analysis. For the 
Clarity project, we have tagged speech acts and 
dialogue games in the Call Home Spanish corpus. 
We have done preliminary cross-level experiments 
on the relationship of word and speech act n-grams 
to dialogue games. Our results show that the la- 
bel of a game cannot be predicted from n-grams 
of words it contains. We get better than base- 
line results for predicting the label of a game from 
the sequence of speech acts it contains, but only 
when the speech acts are hand tagged, and not 
when they are automatically detected. Our fu- 
ture research will focus on finding linguistic cues 
that are more predictive of game labels. The au- 
tomatic classification of speech acts and games is 
carried out in a multi-level architecture that in- 
tegrates classification at multiple discourse levels 
instead of performing them sequentially. 
Introduction 
The Clarity project is devoted to automatic de- 
tection and classification of discourse structures in 
casual, non-task-oriented conversation using shal- 
low, corpus-based methods of analysis. The main 
application of the Clarity discourse classifiers will 
be automatic detection of what discourse partici- 
pants are doing. This includes identifying genres 
(e.g., lecture vs. casual conversation) \[1\], func- 
tional activities (e.g., planning vs. gossiping), and 
discourse phases (e.g., opening vs. closing of a 
negotiation) among other things \[3\]. 1 
l In the work that we are reporting here we do 
not, however, study the notion of genre or register as 
brought forth in functional systemic theory. We will 
say more about his below. 
42 
The first stage of the Clarity project involved 
developing an architecture for a multi-level dis- 
course classifier to be trained and tested on three 
discourse levels: speech acts, dialogue games, and 
functional activities. Tagging, training, and test- 
ing was carried out on the Call Home Spauish 
(CHS) corpus of casual, non-task oriented con- 
versation between family members. The coding 
scheme for speech acts and games is described in 
\[6, 9\]. The automatic lassification of speech acts 
and games is carried out in a multi-level architec- 
ture that integrates classification at multiple dis- 
course levels instead of performing them sequen- 
tially. The multi-level classifier is described in \[7\]. 
The focus of this paper is on the cross-level 
classification of speech acts and dialogue games 
as it is carried out by the multi-level classifier. 
Results of a preliminary experiment show that 
the type or label of a game cannot be predicted 
from n-grams of the words it contains. Predicting 
game labels from the sequences of speech acts they 
contain yields slightly better results (better than 
baseline), but only when the speech acts are hand 
tagged, not when they are automatically detected. 
This is very preliminary research, and we plan in 
the future to experiment with linguistic features 
that are more predictive of game and functional 
activity labels. 
In the course of discussing our tagging scheme 
and classification results, we will comment on the 
specific adaptations of our coding scheme for non- 
task oriented dialogue and for its intended appli- 
cation to functional activity detection. 
The coding schemes for speech acts and di- 
alogue games along with the adaptations for di- 
alogue type and application are summarized in 
Sections 2 and 3. Section 4 describes the multi- 
level classification architecture and our experi- 
ments with cross-level classification of speech acts 
and games. Finally we will discuss the implica- 
tions of our experiment for predicting higher levels 
of discourse structure from lower levels. 
Speech Act Tags 
Our speech act coding is based on the SWBD- 
DAMSL tag set from the Johns Hopkins LVCSR 
Summer Workshop 1997 \[5\]. Modifications were 
made in the tag set for four reasons. First, we 
made some changes to improve inter-coder agree- 
ment. After two taggers tagged CHS, we calcu- 
lated intercoder agreement (79%). (See \[6\] for a 
description of how this was computed) and ex- 
amined confusion matrices howing the tags that 
they disagreed on most. We eliminated the tag 
sv for statement of opinion because taggers did 
not distinguish reliably between sv and s, plain 
statement. To account for some aspects of opin- 
ions that we felt could be tagged, reliably, we have 
added features uch as val +/-  (positive or nega- 
tive value judgement) o the category s. 
The second reason for changes to the coding 
scheme was breaking up large categories. Lan- 
guage models for large categories are thought o 
be mixed bags of diverse information that are not 
sufficiently distinct from language models of other 
categories. Smaller categories hould yield more 
distinct language models. In our first pass tagging 
of CHS, statements ( } accounted for around 40 
per cent of the tags. We broke up the s category 
by adding semantic feature tags (certainty, hypo- 
theticality, expresses peakers mental state, posi- 
tive/negative alue judgement, obligation, past vs 
non-past tense, joke/sarcasm). In the revised cod- 
ing scheme, unmarked s accounts for 26% per cent 
of the tags. 
Unfortunately, this subdivision of s did not 
work as we expected. When our automatic speech 
act classifier was trained on the subcategories of s, 
we found that the marked subcategories could be 
reliably distinguished from each other, but could 
not reliabiy be distinguished from unmarked s. 
We feel that this may be because the language 
model for unmarked s still characterizes too much 
diverse information which overlaps with the char- 
acteristics of the marked subcategories of s. 
The third reason for revisions of the coding 
scheme was to support he task of functional activ- 
ity identification. We hypothesized that semantic 
features uch as hypotheticality and uncertainty, 
might characterize planning-type activities in con- 
trast to gossip-type activities. The correlation be- 
tween our semantic features and functional activ- 
ities remains to be tested. 
The fourth reason for revising the coding 
scheme was to account for types of utterances that 
were very prominent in CHS, but not so prominent 
in SWBD. One tag that we added for this reason 
was atd (attention directive) for cue phrases uch 
as oye (listen) and mira  (look). 
Our speech act tags fall into the categories 
Questions, Answers, Agreement/Disagreement, 
Discourse Markers (including Backchannels), For- 
ward Functions, Control Acts, Statements, and 
Other. The greatest changes with respect to 
SWBD-DAMSL involve an expansion of control 
acts, the addition of coarse emotional tags to 
backchannels, a collapse of statements and opin- 
ions, and the addition of semantic features to 
statements. The complete speech act tag set is 
listed in \[6, 9\]. 
The entire CHS corpus was re-tagged by one 
human tagger using this revised tag set. Intra- 
coder agreement of over 90% was tested by hav- 
ing the tagger e-tag three dialogues everal weeks 
after first tagging them. (Again, see \[6\] for how 
agreement was calculated.) 
Dialogue Game Tags for 
Non-Task-Oriented Dialogue 
We use the following characterization of dia- 
logue games given by Carletta at al. \[2\]: 
"a set of utterances tarting with an initiation 
and encompassing all utterances up until the 
purpose of the game has been either fulfilled 
(e.g. the requested information has been trans- 
ferred) or abandoned." However, our inven- 
tory of games differs from those used for the 
Map Task because we are dealing with non-task 
oriented dialogue. Our system contains eight 
main types of games plus eight modifiers. The 
game types are seeking informa'~ion, g iv ing  
information, giving directive, action 
commit, giving opinion, expressive, seeking 
confirmation, and communication filler. The 
eight modifiers of game tags are sup (support 
previous statement), elab (elaborated answer to 
question), spec (speculation), wk (weak direc- 
tive or commit), s t  (strong directive or commit), 
n (nested game), inc (incomplete game), aband 
(abandoned game). Taggers label turns within a 
game as Initiative, Response, and Feedback. 
Figure 1 shows a fragment of a CHS dialogue 
tagged with speech acts and games. 
43 
#Game:Info 
<I> s A: Llevan una lavadora, 
they bring a washing machine 
<I> s A: llevan una no se' que', 
they bring I don't know what 
<I> s A: llevan una cosa de cada cosa 
they bring one of each 
#Game:Quest'Aband 
<I> qw B: pero como, 
but how 
#Game:quest 
<I> qy B: pero pagan impuestos, 
but are they taxed 
<I> s^cert - 
B: pero se supone clue el menaje no paga 
but household items are not supposed 
to be taxed 
<R> ny A: si' 
yes 
#Game:Info'Elab 
<I> s'e A: no si' paga impuestos, 
no yes it is taxed 
<I> s'cert+ 
A: paga el quince por ciento, si' sen-or 
it's taxed fifteen per cent, yes sir 
<R> b B: ah si' 
oh yes 
<R> s'm B: paga quince por ciento de impuesto 
it's taxed fifteen percent 
Figure h A Fragment of a Tagged Dialogue 
Games may overlap, either as nested games 
or as interleaved games. Game boundaries are de- 
termined by changes in who has the initiative and 
changes in speaker intention, for example changing 
from informing to questioning. 
The  Mu l t i - Leve l  C lass i f ie r  
Arch i tec ture  
The detection of speech acts from words has re- 
ceived a substantial amount of attention in the 
recent past. Most of the recent literature (e.g. 
see \[8, 4\] and their references) describes classifiers 
that are based on n-gram modeling. This tech- 
nology has proven to give reasonable results in a 
variety of domains, although some recent papers 
indicate shortcomings of this approach \[10, 7\]. 
The classifiers based on ngram modeling are a 
special instance of (higher-order) ecursive hidden 
markov models. Recursive hidden markov models 
are used widely in speech recognition. We decided 
to built the incremental lattice construction frame- 
work \[7\] which allows us to account for the over- 
lap problem (multiple speakers at the same time 
on different channels), the application of more 
complex classifiers (currently we are evaluating 
backoff-ngram odels, neural networks and sup- 
port vector machines) and the higher order struc- 
ture. In this section we try to motivate the model- 
ing of dialogue games by adding one more level to 
the speech act detection structure and show that 
this framework can be applied to the game detec- 
tion task .  
Detect ion  f rom the  word  level: It is not ob- 
vious from the outset how n-gram-based classifiers 
should be applied to the detection of discourse 
games. One could try to do segmentation and la- 
beling of discourse gaines directly from the word 
level just as in the speech act task. This approach 
can be characterized as: 
G" = argmaxcp(G lW ) = argmaxGp(W\[G)p(G ) 
Assuming that we can model p(G) reasonably well 
by an n-gram model, the remaining task is to find 
a good estimate for p (WIG ). Assuming that the 
words in a game segment (given the game type) 
do not depend on other games or words this can 
be simplified to the more local rule: 
P (WIG) - -  1-X P(Wil Gi) 
i.=l,...,n 
Furthermore - to make the model tractable -we  
would like to model these probabilities with n- 
gram models. However, it is highly questionable 
that p(Wi lGi  ) can adequately be modeled using 
standard n-gram models, because: 
? it appears that a much smaller portion of n- 
grams have discriminative distributions for dia- 
logue games in comparison with the speech act 
case 
? the interaction between the speakers is lost us- 
ing word level bigram or trigram statistics 
Detect ion  f rom the  speech act level: For 
these reasons, we have been pursuing a sec- 
ond possible modeling approach, which estimates 
p(WilGi)  with a probability model that uses 
speech-acts as an intermediate discourse level: 
p(W lG,) = p(W, lS,, G,)p(S, IG,) 
s 
44  
Using similar independence assumptions as above 
we can rewrite this as 
p(w, IG,) =  p(S, IG,) 
S j=l,...,rni 
In this setup potential speech act constraints of 
dialogue games are enforced explicitly. The dis- 
tributions of p(Wi,j ISi,j, Gi) are also likely to be 
sharper since they are shorter and do not mix un- 
related grammatical information. To make this 
model more tractable we can use a Viterbi ap- 
proximation (which finds and uses the most likely 
speech act sequence rather than summing over all 
possible such sequences). Another simplification 
is to assume that the word probabilities are not 
dependent on the dialogue game they occur in, as 
long as the speech act is known: 
p(Wi,j IS/j, Gi) = p(Wi,j IS/j) 
This assumption can in fact be partially removed 
for frequent speech acts (for example, one could 
have separate statement types for different dia- 
logue games). The overall estimate for p(Wi\]Gi) 
would therefore be: 
argmaxs 1-~ p(SilGi) 1~ P(Wi,jlSl,j) 
i=l,...,n j=l, . . . ,mi 
Incrementa l  Lattice Construction: Both 
models (almost) fulfill the form of a recursive 
HMM, and a dynamic programming solution is 
known for finding the Viterbi speech-act path, 
However the algorithm is complex, especially if 
higher order models are used. Additionally, this 
model ignores the problem of modeling the over- 
lap between speakers, which, when attacked, fur- 
ther complicates the algorithm. It would also be 
nice to be able to use more complex models for 
dialogue game detection, especially models that 
would allow us to transcend the usual n-gram 
constraints and that could be trained discrimina- 
tively 2. Given these complications, we had previ- 
ously proposed an incremental lattice construction 
approach \[7\] (see Fig. 2), that does the following: 
1. generate a lattice from the words 
2. generate a lattice of all likely segments from the 
lattice of the previous level 
2The models mentioned above can easily be trained 
with the maximum likelihood criterion. However -
since we have many irrelevant n-grams - it might be 
advantageous to train these models just to attain a 
good discrimination performance, see \[7, 113\]. 
3. label all segments in the new lattice wi~h their 
tag and likelihood 
4. goto step 2 (next discourse level) or continue to 
step 5 
5. search the most likely path in the complete lat- 
tice given a language model and the likelihoods 
in the lattice 
The input to the discourse classifier can be a 
lattice of words, e.g. produced by a speech recog- 
nizer. A lattice of segments i  produced by an A* 
search over the input lattice that can hypothesize 
segment boundaries and inserts every segment hy- 
pothesis into the segment lattice. The speech act 
lattice is generated by replacing each segment by 
the set of all possible speech act labels and assign- 
ing a likelihood for each segment given the speech 
act. This lattice can then be segmented again and 
annotated with dialogue games. A Viterbi search 
can then find the best combined speech act and 
g~me sequence. 
Exper iments  We have conducted experiments 
for dialogue game detection where we assumed 
that the boundaries of the games were known 3 
We used the seven primary game tags info,  
quest, seek_conf, opinion, direct, express and 
UNDEFINED. Since the primary tag info was fre- 
quently combined with the orthogonal tag e lab 
we split the in fo  category along that secondary 
tag. We used 22 dialogues for training and test- 
ing, applying a 7-fold cross-validation. No inter- 
coder agreement tests have been conducted so far 
(Table 1). 
Game Label Detection 
Input 
chance 
manual speech acts 
words 
speech acts detected from words 
Accuracy 
40.7% 
55.0% 
40.7% 
46.5% 
Table 1: Dialogue game detection results for a 
given dialogue game segmentation 
Discussion and Future Directions 
The results of our dialogue game detection exper- 
iment (Table 1) indicate a number of interesting 
3The main problem is that one has to deal with 
overlap in a slightly different way than in the speech 
act case. 
45 
Viterbi search using a 
? Speech act and game discourse game 
segmentation a d labeling ~ labeling and segmentation model 
Speaker A: Enhance segments ~ 1 
by speech act ~, I 
Segmentation output distribitions ~ I 
Words ~ Segments ~ Speech Acts ~ ~ , ,~ / 
Enhance segments " ~  ~ Speech Acts on | 
by speech act /'? two channels | 
Segmentation output distribitions / J 
Words '- Segments ~ Speech Acts / / \] 
Speaker B: / J 
/ 
Viterbi search including 
a speech act language model 
Speech act 
segmentation a d labeling 
Figure 2: Incremental lattice construction (reproduced from \[7\]) 
conclusions. First, game tags cannot be predicted 
from n-grams of words - -  at least not taking all 
words into account equally. This does not elimi- 
nate the possibility that there may be discrimina- 
tive n-grams of words hidden in various positions 
in the game, and this is a research direction that 
we would like to explore. Our second observation 
is that speech acts help a little in predicting ame 
labels, although current speech act classification 
technology does not yield good enough results for 
this purpose. The reason that speech acts help 
as an intermediate l vel between words and games 
may be because the speech acts already encode 
some of the discriminating words that are neces- 
sary for game detection. Finally, we are left with 
the observation that we have not yet identified the 
linguistic ues that are relevant o game classifica- 
tion. Our future plans include experimenting with 
a variety of linguistic cues of the sort discussed 
by \[3, 1\] in the hope of finding some predictive fea- 
tures that are not captured by our current speech 
act tag set. 
Another line of research is to question the rel- 
evance of the discourse units we are using - -  dia- 
logue games in particular - -  to the tasks of iden- 
tifying functional activities, genres, or phases of 
a discourse. On the one hand, dialogue games 
provide potentially important information about 
which utterances are initiatives and which are re- 
sponses, thus helping to identify which speakers 
are dominant at different points in the conversa- 
tion. On the other hand, dialogue games may not 
identify initiative in the most useful way. If the 
first speaker is providing a recount of all event 
the second speaker may often ask a question with 
the sole purpose of displaying his/her attention to 
the story being told. Our current tagging scheme 
would identify such a question as an initiating ut- 
terance of a question/answer game that is initiated 
by the second speaker with the first speaker in a 
responding role. Clearly this does not reflect the 
actual discourse situation in this case: The f i rst 
speaker is in charge and the second speaker merely 
displays attention. 
For reasons uch as this, we have begun to in- 
vestigate different ypes of discourse units based 
on the idea of genres from system functional in- 
guistics. However, in contrast to the traditional 
work on genre (see \[3\] for a review) we have found 
that in our corpus, distinctions that are based on 
fixed patterns are hard to describe and we are 
therefore actively working on a new annotation 
scheme for something similar to genres. Our pro- 
posal is to identify genre units which consist of ut- 
terances having genre-specific functions. A genre 
unit might, for example, be a piece of a conversa- 
tion that contains gossip. Utterances in this gos- 
sip unit might have gossip-specific functions uch 
46 
as introducing a topic of gossip, summarizing the 
story (which would consist of non-evaluative state- 
ments in the middle of the gossip unit), giving the 
main value judgement, etc. Another genre unit 
might be a story and one of the genre specific func- 
tions of a question might be to encourage the story 
teller. 
Our multi-level classification architecture will 
help us explore alternative tagging schemes for 
multiple levels of discourse structure and the in- 
teraction between them. 
Other Applications of the 
Multi-level Classifier 
We are currently also using the multi-level clas- 
sifter architecture described above for the task of 
detecting dialogue acts in the context of a spo- 
ken language translation system for the travel do- 
main \[11\]. In this system, dialogue acts, parame- 
terized with arguments and their values, serve as 
a shallow interlingua representation for translat- 
ing spoken utterances into other target languages. 
To detect dialogue acts, we use a two-level model 
of discourse structure where the lowest level of 
structure consists of semantic argument categories 
(such as time and date expressions, location ex- 
pressions, and other descriptions of travel domain 
entities). These semantic argument categories are 
detected from the utterance using word n-gram 
models. Speech acts serve as the second level of 
discourse structure in this system, and are mod- 
eled via n-grams of semantic argument categories. 
The combination of speech act and semantic ar- 
gument categories are then mapped into a com- 
plete dialogue act. Statistical dialogue act detec- 
tion is intended to serve as robust alternative to a 
more traditional grammar based analysis compo- 
nent. This indicates that the multi-level classifier 
architecture described here is useful for a variety 
of applications involving classification of complex 
language and discourse structures. 
\[1\] 
\[2\] 
References 
Douglas Biber, Susan Conrad, and Randi 
Reppen. Corpus Lingusitics: Investigating 
Language Structure and Use. Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, 1998. 
Jean Carletta, Amy Isard, Stephen Isard, 
Jacqueline C. Kowtko, Gwyneth Doherty- 
Sneddon, and Anne H. Anderson. The 
reliability of a dialogue structure coding 
scheme. Computational Linguistics, 23(1): 13- 
31, March 1997. 
\[3\] Suzanne Eggins and Diana Slade. Analysing 
? Casual Conversation. Cassell, 1997. 
\[4\] Michael Finke, Maria Lapata, Alon Lavie, 
Lori Levin, Laura Mayfield Tomokiyo, 
Thomas Polzin, Klaus Ries, Alex Waibel, and 
Klaus Zechner. Clarity: Automatic discourse 
and dialogue analysis for a speech and natural 
language processing system. In AAAI Spring 
Symposium on Applying Machine Learning to 
Discourse Processing, March 1998. 
\[5\] Dan Jurafsky, Liz Shriberg, and D. Biasca. 
Switchboard-damsl labeling project coder's 
manual. Technical report, Institute of Cogni- 
tive Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
USA, 1997, 
\[6\] Lori Levin, Ann Thym~-Gobbel, Klaus Ries, 
Alon Lavie, and Monika Woszczyna. A dis- 
course coding scheme for conversational span- 
ish. In ICSLP, 1998. 
\[7\] Klaus Ries. Hmm and neural network based 
speech act detection. In ICASSP, 1999. 
\[8\] Andreas Stolcke, Elizabeth Shriberg, Re- 
becca Bates, Noah Coccaro, Daniel Jurafsky, 
Rachel Martin, Marie Meteer, Klaus Ries, 
Paul Taylor, and Carol Van Ess-Dykema. Di- 
alog act modeling for conversational speech. 
In AAAI Spring Symposium on Applying 
Machine Learning to Discourse Processing, 
March 1998. 
\[9\] Ann Thym~-Gobbel and Lori Levin. Dialogue 
Activity Tagging Manual for Spanish Conver- 
sational Speech. 
http ://wwW ? cnbc. cmu. edu/'gobbel/clar ity/ 
manual intro, html, 1998. 
\[10\] V. Warnke, S. Harbeck, H. Niemann, and 
E. NSth. Discriminative estimation of inter- 
polation parameters for language model clas- 
sifters. In ICASSP, 1999. 
\[11\] M. Woszczyna, M. Broadhead, D. Gates, 
M. GavaldA, A. Lavie, L. Levin, and 
A. Waibel. A modular approach to spoken 
language translation for large domains. In 
AMTA-98, 1998. 
47 
