A Two-level Approach to Coding Dialogue for Discourse 
Structure: Activities of the 1998 DRI Working Group on 
Higher-level Structures* 
Dav id  R .  T raum 
Univers i ty  of Mary land  
t raum@cs.umd.edu 
Chr i s t ine  H .  Nakatan i  
Bell Laborator ies ,  Lucent  Technologies 
chn@research.be l l - labs .com 
Abst ract  
This paper presents a novel two-level 
scheme for coding discourse structure in 
dialogue, which was created by the au- 
thors for the discourse structure subgroup 
of the 1998 DR/meeting on dialogue tag- 
ging. We discuss the theoretical motiva- 
tions and framework for the coding pro- 
posal, and then review the results of coding 
exercises performed by the 1998 DR/ dis- 
course structure subgroup using the new 
manual. Finally, we provide suggestions 
for improving the scheme arising from the 
working group activities at the third DRI 
meeting. 
1 In t roduct ion  
A two-level scheme for coding discourse structure 
in dialogue has been proposed and undergone ini- 
tial testing within the DR/effort. In particular, the 
higher-level structures working group of the third 
DR/ was charged with the task of creating a cod- 
ing scheme concerned exclusively with the discourse 
structure of dialogue. Finding a good starting point 
The discourse structure working group was chaired 
by Christine Nakatani (Bell Laboratories, Lucent Tech- 
nologies) and co-chaired by David Traum (U Maryland). 
Pre-meeting roup participants also included Jean Car- 
letta (U Edinburgh), Jennifer Chu-Carroll (Bell Lab- 
oratories, Lucent Technologies), Peter I-Iceman (Ore- 
gon Graduate Institute), Juha Hirschberg (AT&T Labs), 
Masato Ishizaki (JAIST), Diane Litman (AT&T Labs), 
Owen Rainbow (Cogentex), Jennifer Venditti (Ohio 
State U), Marilyn Walker (At&T Labs), Gregory Ward 
(Northwestern U). Participants at the meeting also 
included Ellen Bard (U Edinburgh), Yasuo Horiuchi 
(Chiba U), Koichi Hoshida (ATR), Yasuhiro Katagisi 
(NTT), Kikuo Maekawa (NLRI), Michael Strube (U 
Pennsylvania), Masafumi Tamato (NTT), Yuki Tateishi 
(Tokyo U), and Takahiro Wakao (TAO). 
for a consensus coding scheme for discourse struc- 
ture in dialogue was a non-trivial task. Most dis- 
course structure schemes in fact were geared toward 
monologue, and most dialogue coding schemes omit- 
ted the higher-level structures that were essential to 
the monologue schemes, or provided only genre or 
domain-specific higher-level structures. 
Given the limited amount of work in this area, 
it was impossible to attempt a comprehensive cod- 
ing scheme for all aspects of discourse structure ill 
dialogue. Instead, we were guided by an analysis of 
what choices needed to be made in creating a coding 
scheme. (Traum, 1998) identifies three dimensions 
along which discourse structure schemes can be clas- 
sifted: granularity, content, structuring mechanisms. 
? Granularity: how much material (time, text, 
turns, etc.) is covered by the units (minimum, 
maximum, and average)? Granularity ranges 
were divided roughly into three categories: 
Micro  - roughly within a single turn 
Meso - roughly an exchange, IR-unit, "game", 
or short "sub-dialogue", 
Macro  - coherent larger spans, related to over- 
all dialogue purposes. 
? Content: what is this a structure of(e.g., inten- 
tions, accessibility, effects, etc.)? 
? ? Structuring mechanisms: What kinds of units 
and structuring principles are used (e.g., fiat, 
set inclusion, hierarchical/CFG structuring, re- 
lational)? How many primitive types of units 
are allowed (one basic unit type, two or three 
types of units, or several types)? 
This multi-dimensional space was then used to clas- 
sify different extant coding schemes as to which as- 
pects they are concerned with. 
Guided by this principled survey of various 
schemes, we decided on an objective of defining a 
101 
pair of coupled schemes at the meso- and macro- 
levels in order to create a dialogue-oriented scheme 
for discourse structure analysis. We felt the micro- 
level of analysis was addressed by the dialogue acts 
coding effort of DRI, and it seemed most productive 
to build meso- and macro-levels on top of that, in 
an independent manner, to see what synergy might 
arise. It did not seem most fruitful to code the same 
content at three different levels, or to code three 
types of content at the macro-level without making 
any attempt o relate that coding to other schemes 
in development within the DRI initiative. 
Thus, for our starting point we proposed two orig- 
inal coding schemes within this multi-dimensional 
space. One scheme which has as content Ground- 
ing (Clark and Schaefer, 1989; Traum, 1994), op- 
erated at a meso level of granularity, and used 
non-hierarchical (and possibly discontinuous ) utter- 
ance sets as its structuring principle. The second 
scheme concerned intentional/informational struc- 
ture (Grosz and Sidner, 1986; Nakatani et al, 1995) 
as content, operated at a macro level of granularity, 
and was structured as hierarchical trees (with anno- 
tations for capturing discontinuities). In addition, 
these two schemes were linked by using the result- 
ing structures from meso-level analysis as basic input 
for macro-level analysis. 
There were several factors motivating the decision 
to use these particular facets of discourse structure 
for initial analysis. First, considering intentions, it 
is clear that aspects of dialogue at all levels of gran- 
ularity relate to the intentions of the participants. 
However, not all of these intentional aspects are at- 
tuned to well-behaved plan-like structures. One is- 
sue is whose intention is under consideration: the 
speaker, the hearer, or the collaborative "team" of 
the speaker and hearer together. It is only at the 
level of grounded content hat some sort of joint or 
shared intentional structure is really applicable. Be- 
low this level, one may only properly talk of indi- 
vidual intentions, even though those intentions may 
be subservient to joint goals (or goals of achieving 
sharedness). Thus taking grounded units (achieved 
at the meso-range) as a starting point for the cod- 
ing of intentional structure is a natural basis for the 
study of joint intentional structure. Individual in- 
tentions at a lower level, especially those relating 
to communication management rather than task are 
expected to be captured within the dialogue act level 
of the DRI coding scheme (Discourse Resource Ini- 
tiative, 1997; Allen and Core, Draft 1997). Likewise, 
the phenomena of grounding can occur on multiple 
levels. However, since macro-level phenomena (such 
as task summarization) differ from more local feed- 
back phenomena (including acknowledgments and 
repairs), restricting the grounding-relating coding to 
the meso-level allows for a more tractable ffort. 
While examining intentional structure at the 
macro range and grounding structure at a meso 
range thus had independent motivations, the coding 
scheme used for this subgroup was designed to test 
a further novel and previously untested hypothesis 
that the units of achieving common ground would 
serve as an appropriate type of basic unit for inten- 
tional analysis. Since the phenomena of grounding 
and intentional task-related structure are somewhat 
independent, there is reason to believe the structures 
might not align properly. However, given the utility 
of having an appropriate meso-level starting point 
for intentional structure, and lacking any compelling 
counter-examples, we decided to put the hypothesis 
to the test in the coding exercises. 
2 The  cod ing  scheme 
The" coding scheme used for pre-meeting cod- 
ing exercises is defined in (Nakatani and Traum, 
1999), which was distributed to the group mem- 
bers prior to coding assignments. As mentioned 
above, this included two levels of coding, common 
ground units (CGUs)  at the meso-level, and inten- 
tional/informational units (IUs) at the macro-level. 
Here we provide a brief summary of these cod- 
ing schemes. Interested parties are referred to the 
manual (Nakatani and Traum, 1999) for detailed in- 
structions and examples. There are three stages of 
coding, which must be performed in sequence. First, 
a preparatory tokenization phase, in which the dia- 
logue is segmented into speaker turns and utterance 
tokens within the turns, each token being given a la- 
bel. This was used as input for the coding of CGUs, 
in which utterance tokens were gathered together in 
units of tokens which together served to add some 
material to the common ground. Finally, the results 
of CGU coding was used as input for IU Coding, 
in which hierarchical intentional structure was built 
from either CGUs or smaller IUs. Each of these pro- 
cesses is briefly described in the subsections below. 
2.1 Common Ground Units (CGUs) 
A Common Ground Unit (CGU) contains all and 
only the utterance tokens needed to ground (that is, 
make part of the common ground) some bit of con- 
tent. This content will include the initial token of 
the unit, plus whatever additional content is added 
by subsequent tokens in the unit and added to the 
common ground at the same time as the initiating 
token. The main coherence principle for CGUs is 
102 
thus not directly related to the coherence of the con- 
tent itself (this kind of coherence is handled at the 
micro and macro levels), but whether the content is 
added to the common ground in the same manner 
(e.g., with the same acknowledgment utterance). 
CGUs will require at least some initiating mate- 
rial by one conversational participant (the initiator), 
presenting the new content, as well as generally some 
feedback (Allwood et al, 1992), or acknowledgment, 
by the other participant. 
The following principles in (1) summarize the de- 
cision procedures for how to code an utterance token 
with respect o existing or new CGUs: 
(1) 1. 
. 
I f  the token contains new content, and 
there is no accessible ungrounded CGU, the 
contents of which could be acknowledged 
together with the current oken 
then create a new CGU, and add this to- 
ken to it. 
i f  there is an accessible CGU for which the 
current oken: 
(a) acknowledges the content 
(b) repairs the content 
(c) cancels the CGU (in this case, also put 
a * before the CGU marker, to indicate 
that it is canceled). 
(d) continues the content, in such a fashion 
that all content could be grounded to- 
gether (with the same acknowledgment) 
then add this token to the CGU 
otherwise, do not add this token to the 
CGU 
Note that these rules are not mutually exclusive: 
more than one may apply, so that a token can be 
added to more than one CGU. 
CGUs are similar in many respects to other meso- 
level coding schemes, such as initiative-response 
in the LINDA coding scheme (Ahrenberg et al, 
1990; Dahlb~ck and JSnsson, 1998), or conversa- 
tional games (Carletta et al, 1997). However, there 
are some important differences. In terms of con- 
tent, CGUs cover only grounding, while the LINDA 
scheme covers initiative more generally, and the 
I-ICRC game structure codes achievement of dia- 
logue purposes. Several authors (e.g., (Allwood et 
al., 1992; Clark, 1994; Dillenbourg et al, 1996), 
consider multiple levels of coordination i  dialogue, 
including roughly those of contact, perception, un- 
derstanding, and attitudinal reaction. Grounding 
(which is what CGUs capture) is mainly concerned 
with the understanding level (and also the percep- 
tion of messages), while there is a large part of the 
notion of response that is concerned with attitudinal 
reaction and not strictly mutual understanding. 
There are also differences in the structuring mech- 
anisms used. In the LINDA coding scheme, IR units 
consist of trees, which may contain embedded IR 
units as constituents. The HCRC scheme does not 
require a strict tree structure, but also allows em- 
bedded games, when one game is seen as subordi- 
nate to the main purpose of another. In contrast, 
CGUs are "fiat" structures, consisting only of a set 
of utterances which work together to add some ma- 
terial to common ground. Moreover, a single ut- 
terance can be part of multiple (non-nested) CGUs. 
For example, except for very short reactions which 
are expressed in the same locution with the feed- 
back signal of understanding, the grounding of the 
reaction itself will also constitute a separate CGU. 
More concretely, consider a suggestion followed by a 
refinement by another speaker. The refinement indi- 
cates understanding of the original, and is thus part 
of the prior CGU, which presents the original, but it 
also'introduces new material (the refinement i self), 
and thus also initiates a new CGU, which requires 
further signals of understanding to he added to the 
common ground. 
Both of these differences in content and structur- 
ing mechanisms can lead to differences in the kinds of 
units that would be coded for a given dialogue frag- 
ment. For example, a question/answer/followup se- 
quence might be one IR-unit or game but two CGUs 
(one to ground the question, and one to ground the 
answer). Likewise, a unit including a repair might 
be coded as two (embedded) IR-units or games, but 
only a single CGU. 
It remains an open question as to whether CGUs 
or one of these other meso-level units might be the 
most appropriate building block for macro-level in- 
tentional structure. One reason to think that CGUs 
might be more appropriate, though, is the use of 
non-hierarchical units, which avoids the question of 
which level of unit to use as starting point. 
2.2 In tent iona l / In fo rmat iona l  Uni ts  ( IUs) 
Macro-level of discourse structure coding involves 
reasoning about the relationships amongst the pieces 
of information that have been established as com- 
mon ground. This is achieved by performing a topic- 
structure or planning-based analysis of the content of 
the CGUs, to produce a hierarchy of CGUs in a well- 
formed tree data structure. Such analysis proceeds 
in similar fashion to the intention-based methodol- 
ogy outlined in (Nakatani et al, 1995), but there 
are some crucial differences. The coding scheme 
of (Nakatani et al, 1995) was developed for mono- 
103 
m 
m 
logic discourse, and is not directly applicable to di- 
alogue. In particular, there is the general problem 
in dialogue, of associating the individual intentions 
of the participants with the overall structure. We 
use CGUs as a starting point helps establish the rel- 
evant intentions as a kind of joint intentional struc- 
ture. While CGU analysis concentrates on estab- 
lishing what is being said at the level of informa- 
tion exchange, macro-level analysis goes beyond this 
to establish relationships at a higher-level, namely 
relationships amongst CGUs (instead of utterance- 
tokens) and relationships amongst groups of CGUs. 
These relationships may be both informational nd 
intentional. Thus, we refer to groupings of CGUs at 
the lowest level of macro-structure as I-UNITS (IUs), 
where 'T' stands for either informational or inten- 
tional. 
IU trees are created by identifying certain kinds 
of discourse relations. Following (Grosz and Sid- 
ner, 1986), macro-level analysis captures two funda- 
mental intentional relations between I-units, those 
of domination (or parent-child) and satisfaction- 
precedence (or sibling) relations. The correspond- 
ing informational relations are generates and en- 
ables (Pollack, 1986; Goldman, 1970). More con- 
cretely, the domination relation can be elaborated 
in a planning-based framework as holding between 
a subsidiary plan and its parent, in which the com- 
pletion of one plan contributes to the completion of 
its parent plan; the satisfaction-precedence relation 
can be elaborated as the temporal dependency be- 
tween two plans (Lochbaum, 1994). As is often the 
case, when a temporal dependency cannot be strictly 
established, two IUs will be placed in a sibling rela- 
tionship by virtue of their each being in a subsidiary 
relationship with the same dominating IU. 
I-unit analysis consists of identifying the higher- 
level intentional/informational structure of the di- 
alogue, where each I-unit (IU) in the macro struc- 
ture achieves a joint (sub)goal or conveys informa- 
tion necessary to achieve a joint (sub)goal. The fol- 
lowing schema captures the decision process for IU 
coding: 
? Establish problem to be collaboratively solved, 
or joint goal. 
? Negotiate how to achieve joint goal. 
This may involve: 
1. Deciding which (of possibly several) 
recipe(s) for action to use, 
2. Deciding how to implement a recipe in the 
participants' domain by instantiating or 
identifying constraints and parameters of 
the recipe (e.g. deciding which of two en- 
gines to move to the orange warehouse), 
3. Breaking the plan down into subplans, 
whose own achievements can be similarly 
negotiated at the subtask level. 
? Confirm achievement of (or failure to achieve) 
joint goal. 
This schema explicitly accommodates the inferential 
interface between the intentional and informational 
levels of analysis. For example, intentional and in- 
formational relations blend as siblings at the level 
of choosing and implementing a recipe and breaking 
down a plan into subplans. This reflects the simple 
fact that achieving a goal via action requires knowl- 
edge of the world (e.g. identification of objects), 
knowledge of how to act in the world (i.e. knowledge 
of recipes), and knowledge of how to reason about 
complex relations among actions (i.e. the ability to 
plan and re-plan). In sum, the blending of inten- 
tional and informational relations in IU coding is an 
original theoretical aspect of this coding scheme. 
3 Cod ing  exerc i ses  
In order to familiarize the group members with the 
coding schemes and provide some initial data for 
discussion, several coding exercises were performed, 
divided into two sets of two dialogues each - first 
TOOT and TRAINS, second Verbmobil (IU on com- 
mon provided CGUs) and Maptask (only a fragment, 
no IU coding). These dialogues are all roughly char- 
acterizable as "task-oriented", although the tasks 
are quite varied. 
The TRAINS dialogue was taken from the 
TRAINS-93 Corpus by the University of Rochester 
(Heeman and Allen, 1994; Heeman and Allen, 1995). 
TRAINS dialogs deal with tasks involving manufac- 
turing and shipping goods in a railroad freight sys- 
tem. TRAINS dialogs consist of two human speak- 
ers, the system and the user. The user is given a 
problem to solve and a map of the world. The system 
is given a more detailed map and acts as a planning 
assistant to the user. Additional online information 
about the dialogues can be found at 
http ://WWl~. cs. ro chest or. edu/res eazch/speech/ 
93dia logs/and about the trains project as a whole 
at 
hl:~;p://www, cs. rochester ,  edu/ reseaxch/ t ra ins /  
Toot dialogues are Human-Computer spoken dia- 
logues, in which the computer system (S) finds Am- 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
104 
trek rail schedules via internet, according to specifi- 
cations provided by the human user (U). The Toot 
system is described in (Litman et el., 1998). The 
dialogue we used for coding, was provided by Diane 
Litman of AT&T Research. 
The Verbmobil project is a long term effort to de- 
velop a mobile translation system for spontaneous 
speech in face-to-face situations. The current do- 
main of focus is scheduling business meetings. To 
support this goal, some English human-human di- 
alogs were collected in this domain. More informa- 
tion about the Verbmobil project can be found on- 
line at http://~ww, dfki. uni-sb, do/verbmob?1/. 
In the dialogue we coded, the two speakers try to 
establish a time and place for a meeting. 
The DCIEM Map Task dialogs from which the 
one we coded (d204), was drawn were collected in 
Canada and consist of pairs of Canadian army re- 
servists collaborating to solve a problem. Both re- 
servists have a map but the maps are not identical 
in terms of the landmarks present. One participant 
is designated the direction giver, G and has a path 
marked on his map. The goal is for the other partic- 
ipant, the direction follower, F to trace this route on 
his map even though he can only communicate with 
G via speech; i.e., these are not face to face conversa- 
tions. Only the opening portion of the dialogue was 
coded, due to the length. More information about 
the DCIEM Map Task corpus can be found online at 
http ://www. here. ed. ac. uk/Si~ o/MAPTASKD, html. 
A fragment taken from the Verbmobil Dialogue, 
along with CGU and IU coding for this fragment is 
shown in Figure 1. Note that some utterances (e.g., 
A.11.1) appear in multiple cgus (serving an acknowl- 
? edgment function for one and a proposal function for 
the other), and some utterances (e.g., B.12.2) do not 
appear in any. 
3.1 CGU Coding Analysis 
The inter-coder reliability of CGU coding was quite 
variable between the different dialogues and for dif- 
ferent stretches within some of the dialogues. Re- 
suits ranged from segments in which all coders coded 
identically to a few segments (for Maptask and Toot) 
in which all coders coded some aspect differently. 
This section outlines some of the qualitative and 
quantitative analysis done on the CGU coding for 
the four dialogues presented in the previous ection. 
3.1.1 Inter-coder Rel iabi l i ty 
It was a bit challenging to devise a meaningful 
measure of inter-coder reliability for the CGU cod- 
ing task. While it is simple to count how many 
coders chose to include a particular unit, there is no 
Verbmobil Dialogue r148c 
. . .  
It.9.2 want to have lunch 
B.10.1 that sounds pretty good 
B. 10.2 are you available just before noon 
A.II.I we can meet at noon 
B.12.1 sounds good 
B.12.2 uhh 
B.12.3 on campus or off 
A.13.1 your choice 
? * .  
CGU and IU coding 
iu. 1 "plan to meet (again)" 
cgu7 
cgu8 
cgu9 
iu. 1.3 
cgul0 
"set meeting time" 
A.9.2, B. 10. I "suggest lunch" 
B.10.2, A.II.I "suggest time" 
A.11.1, B.12.1 "meet at noon" 
"select place for lunch" 
B.12.3, A.13.1 "on campus?" 
.Figure 1: Verbmobil CGU and IU coding 
easy way to devise an expected agreement for such a 
unit. Table 2 shows the average ratio of coders per 
CGU coded by any of the coders. It is not clear how 
to interpret his number, however, since if a partic- 
ular unit was included only by a small amount of 
coders, that means that there was fairly high agree- 
ment among the other coders not to include it. 
D ia logue avg % 
TRAINS 0.41 
TOOT 0.36 
Verbmobil 0.30 
MAPTASK 0.26 
Table 2: Average coders per proposed CGU 
Simply marking down boundary points of units 
would also not work well, since CGUs are allowed to 
be both overlapping and discontinuous. Instead, a 
pseudo-grounding acts scheme was induced, consid- 
ering whether an utterance token begins, continues 
or completes a CGU. This is fueled by the obser- 
vation that, while a token could appear in multiple 
CGUs, it doesn't generally perform the same func- 
tion in each of them. This is not explicitly ruled 
out but does seem to be the case, perhaps with one 
or two exceptions. So, each token is scored as to 
whether or not it appeared (1) as the first token in 
a CGU (2) as the last token in a CGU and/or (3) in 
a CGU in neither the first or last position. 
This system seems ufficient o count as the same 
105 
A 
PA 
PE 
TRAINS 
B M E 
TOOT 
B M E 
Verbmobi l  
B M E 
0.83 0.87 0.85 0.79 0.81 0.78 0.79 0.78 0.89 
0.50 0.65 0.51 0.50 0.52 0.50 0.57 0.51 0.58 
0.66 0.62 0.69 0.58 0.60 0.56 0.52 0.56 0.74 
Maptask  
B M E 
0.69 0.74 0.79 
0.54 0.52 0.56 
0.34 0.45 0.52 
Table 1: CGU Inter-coder Reliability 
all identified CGUs that are the same, and to assess 
penalties for all codings that differ, though it is not 
clear that the weighting of penalties is necessarily 
optimal (e.g., leaving out a middle counts only one 
point of disagreement, but leaving out an end counts 
as two, since the next to last, gets counted as an end 
rather than a middle). 
From this, it was possible to compute agreement 
and expected agreement (by examining the relative 
frequencies of these tags), and thus Kappa (Siegel 
and Castellan, 1988). The numbers for the group as 
a whole are shown in table 1 Systematic individual 
pairwise agreement or cluster analysis was not per- 
formed, however some of the pairwise numbers are 
above 0.8 for some dialogues. 
From this table it is clear that the ending points 
of CGUs in verbmobil has fairly high agreement, as 
does the TRAINS dialogue overall, whereas Map- 
task has fairly low agreement, especially for CGU 
beginnings. 
3.2 IU Coding Analysis 
IU analysis was carried out on the Toot, Trains and 
Verbmobil dialogues. However, as noted, only the IU 
analysis on Verbmobil was conducted starting with 
uniform IUs for all the coders. Thus, the reliability 
for IU coding could be quantitatively measured for 
the Verbmobil dialogue only. Nine coders provided 
IU trees starting from identical CGUs. 
Following the methodology in (ttirschberg and 
Nakatani, 1996), we measured the reliability of cod- 
ing for a linearized version of the IU tree, by calcu- 
lating the reliability of coding of IU beginnings using 
the kappa metric. We calculated the observed pair- 
wise agreement of CGUs marked as the beginnings 
of IUs, and factored out the expected agreement es- 
timated from the actual data, giving the pairwise 
kappa score. 
Table 3 gives the raw data on coders marking of 
IU beginnings. For each CGU, a "1" indicates that 
it was marked as an IU-initial CGU by a given coder. 
A "0" indicates that it was not marked as IU-initial. 
Table 4 shows the figures on observed pairwise 
agreement, orthe percentage ofthe time both coders 
agreed on the assignment of CGUs to IU-initial po- 
Coder 
CGU 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 TOTAL 
1: 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 9/9 
2: 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0/9 
3: 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 3/9 
4: 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0/9 
5: 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 3/9 
6: 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0/9 
7: 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 8/9 
8: 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 3/9 
9: 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1/9 
10: 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 9/9 
11: 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0/9 
12: 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 2/9 
1"3: 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1/9 
14: 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 7/9 
15: 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 9/9 
Table 3: Summary of IU coding for all coders ( I=IU- 
initial, 0=non-IU-initial) 
ID 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1 1 .8 .73 .93 .6 .93 .93 .93 .73 
2 1 .53 .73 .67 .73 .73 .73 .8 
3 1 .8 .6 .8 .67 .8 .73 
4 1 .67 1 .87 1 .8 
5 1 .67 .67 .67 .73 
6 1 .87 1 .8 
7 1 .87 .67 
8 1 .8 
9 1 
Table 4: Observed agreement for IU-initial CGUs 
sition. 
We calculated the expected probability of agree- 
ment for IU-initial CGUs to be P(E)=.375, based on 
the actual Verbmobil codings. Given P(E), kappa 
scores can be computed. Table 5 shows the kappa 
scores measuring the reliability of the codings for 
each pair of labelers. 
As the kappa scores show, there is some individ- 
ual variation in IU coding reliability. On average, 
however, the kappa score for pairwise coding on IU- 
initial CGUs is .64, which is moderately reliable but 
shows room for improvement. 
By examining Table 3, it can be Seen that there 
was in fact always a decisive majority label for each 
106 
ID 1 2 3 " 4 5 6 7 8 '9 
1 . 1 .7 .57 .89 .36 .89 .89 .89 .57 
2 1 .25 .57 .47 .57 .57 .57 .68 
3" ' 1 .68 .38 .68 .47 .68 .57 
4 \] .47 1 .79 1 .68 
5 1 .47 .47 .47 .57 
6 1 .79 1 .68 
7 " 1 .79 .47 
8 1 .68 
9 1 
Table 5: Palrwise kappa scores 
CGU, i.e. there are no CGUs on which the coders 
were split into two groups of four and five in their 
coding decision for IU-initial CGUs. A weaker elia- 
bility metric on the pooled data from nine coders, 
therefore, would provide a reliable majority cod- 
ing on this dialogue (see (Passonneau and Litman, 
1997) for discussion of how reliability is computed 
for pooled coding data). In fact, for the group of 
six coders who showed the most inter-coder agree- 
ment, the average palrwise kappa score is .80, which 
is highly reliable. 
4 Summary  and  Future  Work  
In addition to the quantitative analysis of eodings, 
the subgroup at the 1998 DRI meeting reiterated 
some goals for the scheme in general and made 
progress on several open theoretical issues3 First 
and foremost, it was agreed upon that CGU analy- 
sis at the meso-level allowed coders to abstract he 
"messy" bits of dialogue (e.g., local repair, turn- 
taking, grounding) into common ground units, mak- 
ing the structures at both the meso- and macro- 
levels cleaner. The consensus was that many NLP 
applications would benefit from this abstraction, 
which can help separate to a large degree the pro- 
cessing of dialogic phenomena from the processing 
of intentions and informational units at the dialogue 
planning level. 
As for theoretical issues, the subgroup laid out 
initial proposals for exploring the interface between 
Damsl tagging at the dialogue act micro-level, and 
CGU analysis at the meso-level. One important 
open issue was whether to modify the coding scheme 
to identify different types of acknowledgments sepa- 
rately, especially when the acknowledgment function 
was parasitic on a more direct relation, such as an 
answer to a question. It was found that alternative 
proposals for placing CGU boundaries patterned 
a Full details of the subgroup roceedings can be found 
in the DRI report of the 1998 meeting, also available 
from the first author. 
with differences in backward- and forward-looking 
properties of the ambiguous tokens. The general 
principle that was agreed upon was that we should 
investigate further the situations in which dialogue 
act coding can serve as the basis for CGU coding de- 
cisions, just as CGU codings serve as the primitive 
units for constraining IU analysis in a substantial 
way. A more general principle was to identify when 
independent decisions at one level could influence 
the coding decisions at a second level, e.g. when 
an IU boundary resolved a difficult CGU boundary 
decision. Defining non-circular coding guidelines ap- 
pears feasible, if difficult. 
While the reliability results presented here are al- 
ready close to acceptable, directions for future work 
are clear. In particular, extensions to include addi- 
tional dimensions of dialogue content would be desir- 
able; the current scheme considers only grounding at 
the meso-range, and information/intention content 
at the macro-range. Secondly, we expect refinement 
and revision of the initial coding manual, (Nakatani 
and'Traum, 1999), will facilitate both greater elia- 
bility and utility of the two levels we do cover. We 
hope other researchers will explore whether a more 
productive synergy can be found between the two 
levels, both in theory and in practice. The relation 
we hypothesize between the two levels, and our sup- 
position that important relations may be found be- 
tween micro-level schemes and the two-level scheme 
posited here, lay the groundwork for more focused 
investigations of coding schemes for discourse struc- 
ture in dialogue than have previously existed within 
the DR/initiative. 
References 
Lars Ahrenberg, Nils Dahlb~ick, and Arne J6nsson. 
1990. Discourse representation and discourse 
management for a natural anguage dialogue sys- 
tem. In Proceedings of the Second Nordic Con- 
ference on Text Comprehension i Man and Ma- 
chine. 
James Allen and Mark Core. Draft, 1997. 
Draft of darnsl: Dialog act markup in sev- 
eral layers, available through the WWW at: 
http:/ www.cs.rochester.edu/research\]trains/ 
annotation. 
Jens Allwood, Joakim Nivre, and Elisabeth Ahlsen. 
1992. On the semantics and pragmatics of linguis- 
tic feedback. Journal of Semantics, 9. 
Jean Carletta, Amy Isard, Stephen Isard, Jacque- 
line C. Kowtko, Gwynewth Doherty-Sneddon, and 
107 
Anne H. Anderson. 1997. The reliability of a di- 
alogue structure coding scheme. Computational 
Linguistics, 23(1):13-31. 
Herbert H. Clark and Edward F. Schaefer. 1989. 
Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 
13:259-294. Also appears as Chapter 5 in (Clark, 
1992). 
Herbert H. Clark. 1992. Arenas of Language Use. 
University of Chicago Press. 
Herbert H. Clark. 1994. Managing problems in 
speaking. Speech Communication, 15:243- 250. 
Nils DahlbKck and Arne JSnsson. 1998. A coding 
manual for the linkSping dialogue model, unpub- 
lished manuscript. 
Pierre Dillenbourg, David Traum, and Daniel 
Schneider. 1996. Grounding in multi-modal task- 
oriented collaboration. In Proceedings of the Eu- 
ropean Conference on AI in Education. 
Discourse Resource Initiative. 1997. Standards for 
dialogue coding in natural language processing. 
Report no. 167, Dagstuhl-Seminar. 
A. I. Goldman. 1970. A Theory of Human Action. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Barbara J. Grosz and Candace L. Sidner. 1986. At- 
tention, intention, and the structure of discourse. 
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175-204. 
Peter A. Heeman and James Allen. 1994. The 
TRAINS 93 dialogues. TRAINS Technical Note 
94-2, Department of Computer Science, Univer- 
sity of Rochester. 
Peter A. Heeman and James F. Allen. 1995. The 
Trains spoken dialog corpus. CD-ROM, Linguis- 
tics Data Consortium, April. 
Julia Hirschberg and Christine Nakatani. 1996. 
A prosodic analysis of discourse segments in 
direction-giving monologues. In Proceedings ofthe 
34th Annual Meeting of the A CL, Santa Cruz. As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 
Diane J. Litman, Shimei Pan, and Marilyn A. 
Walker. 1998. Evaluating response strategies in a 
web-based spoken dialogue agent. In Proceedings 
COLING-ACL-98. 
Karen Lochbaum. 1994. Using Collaborative Plans 
to Model the Intentional Structure of Discourse. 
Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University. Available as 
Technical Report 25-94. 
Christine H. Nakatani and David R. Traum. 1999. 
Coding discourse structure in dialogue (version 
1.0). Technical Report UMIACS-TR-99-03, Uni- 
versity of Maryland. 
Christine H. Nakatani, Barbara Grosz, David Ahn, 
and Julia Hirschberg. 1995. Instructions for anno- 
tating discourse. Technical Report 21-95, Center 
for Research in Computing Technology, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA, September. 
Rebecca Passonneau and Diane Litman. 1997. Dis- 
course segmentation by human and automated 
means. Computational Linguistics, 23(1):103- 
140. 
Martha E. Pollack. 1986. Inferring Domain Plans 
in Question-Answering. Ph.D. thesis, University 
of Pennsylvania. 
S. Siegel and N. J. Castellan. 1988. Nonparametric 
statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw- 
Hill, 2nd edition. 
David R. Traum. 1994. A Computational Theory 
of Grounding in Natural Language Conversation. 
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Science, 
University of Rochester. Also available as TR 545, 
Department of Computer Science, University of 
Rochester. 
David R. Traum. 1998. Notes on dialogue structure. 
Unpublished manuscript. 
108 
