Web Access to Corpora: the W3Corpora  Project* 
Doug Arnold 
Depar tment  of  Language and  L ingu is t ics ,  
Un ivers i ty  of  Essex,  
Wivenhoe Park ,  
Co lchester ,  Essex,  
CO4 3SQ, U .K .  
emai l :  doug@essex ,  ac .  uk 
1 I n t roduct ion  
In this day an age, some corpus linguistics hould 
be part of every course to do with language. But 
learning about corpus linguistics - -  its possibili- 
ties and limitations - -  is not just a matter of ac- 
quiring information. The best way to learn about 
corpus linguistics is to do it, and the best way 
to teach corpus linguistics is to put students into 
a position where they can do it ((Leech, 1997), 
(Fligelstone, 1993)). This requires corpora, and 
tools, in addition to teaching materials. 
For a number of reasons, the World Wide Web 
offers a good method for delivering this (see be- 
low). This paper will present a resource that en- 
ables students to get a general introduction to cor- 
pus linguistics via the Web. The resource is cur- 
rently available for general use. See Table 1 for 
URLs. 
No very great claims will be made for the re- 
source in terms of being highly original or vision- 
ary in style of interaction or implementation. On 
the contrary, the model of learning is rather tra- 
ditional, and the approach taken was very sim- 
ple and straightforward. However, this in itself 
may be interesting as providing a baseline against 
which more visionary approaches can be compared 
- -  this is probably the simplest way one could 
go about providing Internet based education. In 
addition, some of the design decisions and lesson 
learned may be of interest. 
Section 2 presents the motivation for the project 
that produced the resource. Section 3 will give an 
Tile project was the joint work of Ylva Berglund, 
Natalia Brines-Moya, Martin Rondell and the author 
in the period 1996-8. The results can be seen at: 
http:/ /c lwww.essex.ac.uk/w3c/.  The project was 
funded by JISC (the Joint Information Systems Com- 
mittee of the UK Higher Education Funding Coun- 
cils), as part of JTAP, the JISC Technonology Ap- 
plication Programme. Thanks also to the anonymous 
workshop referees for valuable comments. None of this 
shifts responsibility for errors and other imperfections 
f ron l  Inc.  
overview of the resource. Section 4 describes and 
compares ome similar resources that are avail- 
able. Section 5 describes some problems and 
lessons that can be learned, and notes some open 
questions. 
2 Motivation, Design Criteria 
The motivation for the project was the observa- 
tion that the up-take of corpus linguistics is not 
what it should be - -  in this day and age some 
corpus linguistics should be part of every course 
to do with language. The problem is that learn- 
ing about corpus linguistics involves doing it, and 
that the overheads involved in getting started in 
doing or teaching corpus linguistics are consider- 
able. Corpora in many languages are now easily 
available, but to use them requires a significant in- 
vestment in hardware (e.g. disk space), software 
(tools need to be downloaded and installed), and 
time and effort (the tools have to be understood 
and techniques mastered). All this is hard enough 
for the individual researcher. In a teaching con- 
text, all these problems will typically be magnified 
by the need to deal with differences in the envi- 
ronment available to students (architecture, oper- 
ating system, software: if something can differ, it 
will differ; if a difference can matter, it will mat-  
ter). 
Corpus linguistics should be a part of every 
scheme of study, and it may have a role in al- 
most every piece of research. But it need not be 
a central theme, certainly not central enough to 
justify the effort involved. It would be nice to be 
able have (say) three sessions on corpus linguis- 
tics in a course with a wider focus, and in that 
time give students a real feeling for what can be 
gained, and what are the limitations. It would be 
nice for a researcher to be able to find out whether 
corpora can provide any useful data about some 
phenomenon without having to actually become a
corpus linguist. 
There are surely many areas of linguistics, even 
computational linguistics, that are like this: as 
subjects develop, it becomes impossible for stu- 
dents or researchers to master the full range of 
ideas and techniques, and there is an increasing 
need for the provision of knowledge of subject ar- 
eas at a 'contextual' rather than specialist level. 
It is important to be able convey something about 
a wide range of areas very briefly, but (hopefully) 
without trivialization. 
So, the goal of the project was to provide in- 
stant, and instantly usable, access to corpora, in- 
cluding tools to manipulate them, as well as gen- 
eral information and tutorial information about 
how and why One might manipulate them. 
Of course, the World Wide Web is excellent for 
this. In principle, all the user needs is a Web 
connection and a browser. Beyond this, no in- 
vestment of money, and little investment of ef- 
fort should be needed: there should be no need to 
obtain and install corpora, or download and in- 
stall software, and the interface to the corpus ma- 
nipulating tools should already be familiar (since 
it would be based closely on their web browser). 
Moreover, from a teaching perspective, problems 
of different architecture (etc) are minimized - -  all 
that is necessary is the browser and the Web con- 
nection. 
Given these aims and motivation, a number of 
design decisions are rather natural: 
? The system should be immediately usable 
by anyone with WWW access and a Web 
Browser, for example: 
- it, should be usable without the need to 
install or download any programs; 
- it should be usable with essentially any 
generally available browser; 
- it should be usable without the need to 
register and get authorization. 
? The interface should be as 'friendly' and easy 
to use as possible; it should be supported by 
extensive on-line help, and backed up by de- 
tailed information about corpus linguistics in 
general, and how to 'do' corpus linguistics in 
a. practical way, using a tool such as this. 
? It is typical of novice users that they make 
mistakes with queries; thus, there should be 
some method for users to correct and 'refine' 
their queries very easily (this lead to the idea 
of an editable 'search history'). 
? It should be possible for a user to search their 
own Corpora - -  in this way a user can explore 
not only what is possible in general, but what 
is possible in relation to the kinds of material 
they are interested in or have to deal with. 
A major problem with Web delivery is the 
network overhead. Thus the source code 
should be freely available (in GNU 'Copyleft' 
style), which should allow the system to be in- 
stalled and run locally over the Web at other 
sites. 
3 Imp lementat ion ,  Overv iew o f  the  
W3Corpora  Web-S i te  
This section will give an overview of 
W3Corpora web-site. See Table 1 for URLs. 
The site is divided into three main parts: 
the 
Genera l  In fo rmat ion  where the user can learn 
about corpus linguistics in general (e.g. gen- 
eral discussions: 'What is a corpus?' issues of 
corpus design and annotation, research areas, 
bibliography, etc). This is the kind and level 
of information one might expect in an intro- 
ductory text book, e.g. (Barnbrook, 1996) or 
(Kennedy, 1998). 
Tutor ia l  where the user can find out how to use 
the tools provided, and where some areas are 
described where corpus techniques are useful. 
A variety of tasks are described in some de- 
tail with practical examples (e.g. how to in- 
vestigate the meaning of word, compare two 
similar words, how a word is used in different 
contexts, investigating spelling, and choice of 
preposition in a context like an explanation 
of/for something). Here an elsewhere, the 
emphasis is on classical corpus linguistics, ne- 
glecting e.g. statistical techniques that can be 
built on top. 
Here the key aim is to answer, as quickly and 
easily as possible the two questions: 'How can 
I use this thing?' and 'What can I use it 
for?' It does not pretend to be a complete, 
stand-alone tutorial in Corpus Linguistics; it 
does not go to the length of (say) (Aston and 
Burnard, 1997), nor does it go into the same 
level of detail. The primary aim is to take 
the user to the point where they can answer 
the question 'Is Corpus Linguistics useful in 
my study and research?', and in case of an 
affirmative answer, give a basis for proceed- 
ing (perhaps, in fact most likely, with other 
resources and tools, installed locally to avoid 
network overheads). 
Search Eng ine  where the user can carry out 
corpus searches. 
'Top level': 
General Information: 
Tutoriah 
Search Engine: 
http://clwww.essex.ac.uk/w3c/ 
http://clwww.essex.ac.uk/w3c/corpusling/content/introduction.html 
http://clwww.essex.ac.uk/w3c/help/intro/start~age.html 
http://clwww.essex.ac.uk/w3c/corpusling/content/search~ngine.html 
Table 1: Web Addresses for W3Corpora Resources 
Apart from the Search Engine, the implementa- 
tion is rather straightforward: text marked up as 
html, there is extensive use of frames o that users 
are able to maintain an overview of documents as 
well pursuing detail. 
The implementation of the Search Engine mer- 
its more discussion, but it is also based on rather 
standard techniques, using cgi-bin scripts written 
in Perl, and fairly standard indexing techniques to 
speed up searching. 
When a user arrives at the top-level search 
page, she is invited to select a corpus and from 
a menu, and to speciI) a search string and search 
type (e.g. regular expression, exact match, whole 
words, etc). Confirming these selection generates 
a 'session file' which records the selections. Also 
generated is a file recording various default values 
for options dictating inter alia what sort of re- 
sults should be displayed first (frequency, or Key 
Word In Context - -  KWIC),  for KWIC results, 
how many results should be displayed at one time, 
how much context should be displayed, etc. etc. 
The user can modify these options interactively 
via a form, which is generated in response to click- 
ing the 'Options' button at the top of the screen. 
Currently, some 19,000,000 words (321) texts from 
the Gutenberg Project corpora can be searched. 1 
A flavour of the interface to the Search En- 
gine can be gained from Figure 1, which shows 
the results of searching for the regular expression 
/ \[Nn\] i ce /  over a subset of the Gutenberg texts, 
and clicking on one of the results to view the wider 
context. An early stage in the project defined a 
list of properties that a corpus searching inter- 
face should have (Brines-Moya nd Hartill, 1998). 
This interface satisfies ahnost all. 
A large amount of on-line help is available (via 
the 'Help') button (the information supplied is 
somewhat sensitive to the particular screen being 
viewed). 
'Frequency' and 'Display' buttons generate dif- 
ferent views of the search results: 
? The 'Frequency' button generates frequency 
information for a search (total number of hits, 
l l Million words of the LOB corpus, tagged and 
untagged can also be searched, after a user has regis- 
tered and re(:eived a password. 
hits per-subcorpus, and lexical information 
- -  e.g. how many of the hits for / \[Nn\] i ce /  
arise from the the word nice, how many from 
nicer, nicest, Venice, cornice, etc). 
* The 'Display' button generates a KWIC dis- 
play of search results (see Figure 1). KWIC 
results are editable - -  the user can delete cer- 
tain results, and can also call up wider con- 
text by clicking on a key word. 
The 'Search' button allows the user to (i) carry 
out a totally new search, (ii) 'refine' the existing 
search, or (iii) view, and modify the search history. 
Refining a search returns a subset of the cur- 
rent search: the user supplies a regular expres- 
sion which potential hits must satisfy in addi- 
tion to the original pattern. Thus, one might re- 
fine /\[Nn\] i ce /  to /^ \[Nn\]/ to eliminate Venice 
and cornice as hits, a further refinement to /e$ /  
would eliminate nicer and nicest. A sequence of 
refinements constitutes a search history: users can 
view, and edit a search history - -  moving back- 
wards and forwards through the different stages 
of a search. The user can also delete stages (e.g. 
to leave just an initial and a final stage). 
An aspect of the system that may be particu- 
larly useful to teachers is the ability to up- load 
corpora for searching. When a user up-loads a 
(plain text) corpus to the Web-site (by anony- 
mous ftp), it becomes selectable for searching. 
When so selected, it is indexed and prepared for 
searching in the normal way. This may be par- 
ticularly useful to teachers who want students to 
carry out exercises on particular corpora that are 
not already provided at the site. 
The site has been used and positively evaluated 
by 'expert users' (i.e. with a background in cor- 
pus linguistics), and by students at Essex and else- 
where, but there are many open questions about 
how it can or should best be used in the context of 
different courses and learning situations (see Sec- 
tion 5). 2 
2The webpage of the course at 
Essex which used the resources is 
http ://privatewww. essex, ac. uk/- s cholp/ig478cs, htm. 
It is taught by my colleague Dr. Phil Scholfield, 
whom I hereby thank for his advice and feedback. 
On this course, Corpus Linguistics is covered in 
File Edit View GO Communicator Help 
KWIC FRAME ~_~ 
1.10/~) 
shorp I We, n done, Carat  I Oood dog I ~=.  old fello'w I Now behove pzetty I "Aad DELETE 
age to get mmied ,~irh a M_,  ?e~sible ~ that could ~preci~:e ~ DELETE 
forlitde voraeam dJfficul~.u .A ~ liole, whexe allrhelicdewomen D\]:~LET/~ 
a most disc, ngmslied m~uex.  "All,  how ~. .  of you, my deer sexless tI DELETE 
on in the world. Oh, a ~ lot alley e~e t "Vandeuw~ did his DELIFTE 
heart ! Oh,  it would be too ~ if we could always five to geexh~r DELE'I~ 
~gre.~,becaus~itwouldbeso ~ forchem~threeto  ~ty  ~EI.J~TE 
of e.n.noyance. They had choa~, a ~ d~,  cecrte~y, ~ ~ Hi~aess on DELE'I"~ 
d,.e couat : "You'll see, sho'e vexy ~ i Slie.'l going to kiss you I" But DELETE 
f ollovyiag crude,~izv.cism about E~telle : "A  ~ broomsdck ~et to shove iato a DELETE 
KEY 
The Gutenberg Project, a collec~on of eleca'onic texts. 
Tomorrow by los~h Comad. 
CONTEXT FRAME 
Hany would be one-~d - ~hir ty next July, he d~l~red. Prop~ age to get married u4th ? nice, sensible ~ifl chat: could appreciate a 
go od home. H e was a very high-spirked b oy. Hi~h-spirked husbands were ~t  e.~sieet to manage. These me~m, soft chap s,  ~hat 
you would d~.r& buyer wouldn't melt in ~hoir moues ,  ~eze the ones to make a worn-en ~oxou~ly s i s  arable. And dlexe wu norking 
like a home - - a fireside - - a good roof : no rcaung out o~ your w~rm bed in rill sons of weadRx. "Eh ,  my deex ? " 
Figure 1: KW!C Display of search Results: the user has selected options which allow results to be 
deleted and which indicate which sub-corpus each hit comes from. At the bottom of the page the wider 
context of one of the hits is displayed (the user has clicked on one of the individual hits to obtain this). 
4 Existing Work, Comparisons 
There are a large number of tools and systems that 
offer something similar to what the W3Corpora 
site seeks to provide. They range from simple 
Unix command-l ine style programs like Ptx, to 
sophisticated GUI interfaces. For local installa- 
tion, on a Macintosh one has Conc 1.7, and 
ParaConc ;  for DOS/Windows, one has ICEUP 
(ii"om ICE), LEXA (from ICAME), M ic ro -  
OCP,  Mu l t i concord ,  LDB (from Nijmegen), 
Wordsmi th  Tools, TACT,  and Sara  (for the 
BNC); for Unix, there many standard utilities, as 
well as ptx ,  and Xkwic  (from Stuttgart). 
As regards Web-accessible resources, the fol- 
lowing should me mentioned: 
BNC The BNC site provides access to a subset 
four 2-hour sessions , two of which are descriptive, 
two practical; in the latter two the students use the 
W3Corpora search engine, under supervision. A 
practical corpus investigation, using tools such as the 
W3Corpora search engine, is one of the options for 
course assessment .  
of the British National Corpus on a trial ba- 
sis. This permits simple searches on-line, but 
with limited number of hits, and limited in- 
formation about the hits. Registration for a 
trial account (20 days) is required. Full ac- 
cess requires downloading (Windows) client 
program (available for Windows95, and Win- 
dows3.x only), and payment of an annual reg- 
istration fee. It is restricted to users within 
the EC. 
Canad ian  Hansard  This site permits access to 
the proceedings of the Canadian Parliament 
in English and French. These are paraiiel 
corpora (English and French), searches may 
be mono- or bi-lingual (in either case, the 
results returned are bi-lingual - -  i.e. the 
user sees both the context where the search 
term appears, and translation). In the mono-  
lingual case one can see how an expression 
is used and translated. The bi-lingual case 
allows one to see, e.g. where English com- 
mi tment  is translated as French attachement.  
In addition to verbatim (case independent) 
searches, it is also possible to perform a dic- 
tionary search, e.g. the query: pu l l+ the 
plug will match pull the plug, pulling the plug, 
pulls the plug, etc, and to search for words 
that do not appear contiguously (e.g. make 
... arraugements). No frequency information 
is provided. 
CobuUd This site gives limited access to the 
Cobuild Corpora: the "Bank of English" 
(over 50million words), giving an idea of the 
kinds of search possible with the full system. 
It, is possible to search for regular expressions 
(including a special character which matches 
inflectional endings), combinations of words, 
and part of speech tags. Only 40 lines of 
concordance are returned, and no informa- 
tion about frequency, or wider context is ac- 
cessible. It is also possible to search for collo- 
cates of words, based on either of two statisti- 
cal scores (mutual information and T-score). 
The site does not provide much in the way of 
help pages, and there is no tutorial. 
TACTWeb a pilot version of the TACTWeb 
software can be used on the Bergen Corpus of 
London Teenager Language (TACTWeb is in- 
tended to make a TACT style text database 
accessible over the WWW). This is close in 
intention to the present project. At the time 
of writing, it is still under development. 
LDC/Brown Corpus  Text Corpora, and 
Speech Corpora, are accessible via the Lin- 
guistic Data Consortium. After registration, 
it is possible to access the Brown Corpus. 
For individuals who are not (affiliated to) 
members of the LDC it is possible to register 
as a guest, and access corpora with the 
password that is sent to the user by email. 
Frequency information is available, and a 
wide variety of searches is supported, concor- 
dances can be generated, and collocational 
intbrmation retrieved. Access to the T IMIT  
Speech Corpus is similar. 
It is obvious that some of these sites pro- 
vide functionality that is not available at the 
W3Corpora site - -  notably (i) multi-l ingual 
searching and searching over parallel corpora, 
(ii) collocational information, and (iii) 'dictionary 
style searching' - -  and several provide access to 
far more extensive corpus resources. 
On the other hand none of these sites dupli- 
cates what is available at the W3Corpora site. 
In particular, none of them provides the balance 
of easy (immediate) access to usable quantities of 
corpus material, with easy, customizable function- 
ality, and extensive user support and tutorial facil- 
ities. So far as I know, in no case is the source code 
freely available. Where they do provide semi- 
introductory access (e.g. by means of free regis- 
tration and/or a guest account), there is generally 
very little in the way of of tutorial material. 3 
5 Conclusion: some Problems, 
Lessons and Open Questions 
By far the most serious problem that the project 
faced was the difficulty of getting corpus resources 
that could be made freely available (i.e. without 
registration) over the Web. 
The whole system took about two years (three 
person years) to complete. This is a considerable 
effort, and one that is only worthwhile for a rel- 
atively stable area like corpus linguistics, where 
there one can reasonably expect several years of 
use for a resource. 
The finished system is very large: the search 
engine and interface involves over 12,000 lines of 
code, much of it very straightforward (Perl com- 
mands to generate the html forms that provide 
the interface). It is hard to resist the sense that 
there should be an easier way to do this. 
Using html forms brings some problems. In par- 
ticular, the lack of any kind of ' interactive' forms 
means that the interface is more complicated than 
it might otherwise need be (a form must be com- 
pleted in toto and then submitted - -  it cannot be 
partially completed and updated on the fly). 
The Perl-cgi-bin combination is powerful and 
excellent for small applications, but there is a se- 
vere lack of good debugging tools. 
It had originally been hoped to make the re- 
source both 'future proof' and 'past proof'. The 
former is not too problematic - -  the technology 
involved is likely to be supported for many years 
to come. But the latter - -  the intention to make 
the resource usable with essentially any kind of 
browser - -  quickly proved impossible, because of 
the need to use frames in serving the search engine 
interface. 
The resource is now fully operational and avail- 
able. While it has been evaluated by a number of 
different kinds of users in a number of contexts, 
there are still many open questions about how it 
can or should best be used. 
In designing the resources, we had in mind a 
casual, novice user, either an individual student 
or researcher with an interest in, but no strong 
aSee (Arnold et al, 1999) for a fuller discussion of 
alternatives. 
comnfitment to, Corpus Linguistics, or a student 
on a course where Corpus Linguistics has a mi- 
nor place (in the order of, say, three two hour 
sessions). See (Arnold and Berglund, 1998) for a 
little more discussion of this. (We took the view 
that committed users would invest the effort in in- 
stalling corpora and corpus searching tools locally, 
and would find the overheads of WWW access un- 
acceptable). Similarly, the resource was intended 
to be 'stand-alone' - -  this was intended to make it 
as generally usable as possible. This means it does 
not form part of a larger suite of materials, and 
there are open questions about how it should best 
be integrated into schemes of study, and about 
what sorts of teaching method are appropriate. 
At one extreme, a teacher may simply note the re- 
sources as one among many resources available for 
further investigation, at another, one could imag- 
ine entire classes trying to access the resources at 
the same time, with similar queries, under the di- 
rect supervision of a teacher. Apart from obvious 
remarks about the machine and network loading 
implications of the latter, I have nothing to offer 
here. But these are important issues, and since 
this range of possibilities exist in principle for any 
Web-Based resource, quite general. 
The resources and tools were designed for 
WWW based access. But many of the advan- 
tages (and a few other benefits) can be gained by 
a local area (LAN) installation. The cost is that 
the tools and corpora must be installed and main- 
tained locally, the advantage is that one eliminates 
the WWW network overhead, and no longer has 
to rely on a remote site to provide the resource. 4 
Again, this is a general question for WWW based 
teaching, but one on which it is hard to say any- 
thing general. From a users point of view, the key 
questions are obviously the reliability of the re- 
mote site, compared to the reliability of local sys- 
tems, and the inconvenience of the network over- 
head. These are matters which will vary greatly 
from one place to another, and will depend on 
the resources being provided - -  in the case of the 
W3Corpora, there is still insufficient experience in 
practice to do much more than raise the questions. 
Re ferences  
Doug Arnold and Y1va Berglund. 1998. WWW 
access to corpora: a tool for teaching 
and learning about corpora. In TALC- 
4Of course, once one has decided to go for a lo- 
cal installation, there are many alternatives to the 
W3Corpora resources, and one is not tied to a Web 
browser style interface. 
98 (Third International Conference on 
Teaching and Language Corpora), Keeble 
College, Oxford, 24-27 July. Humanities 
Computing Unit, Oxford University, Oxford. 
http ://clwww. essex, ac. uk/w3c/corpusling/TALC, html. 
Doug Arnold, Bas Aarts, Justin Buck- 
ley, Ylva Berglund, Gerald Nelson, and 
Martin Rondell. 1999. Corpora and 
grammars on the web: the W3Corpora-  
IGE Project, final report JTAP-2/247.  
http ://clwww. essex, ac. uk/w3c-ige/FinalReport/, 
February. 
D.J. Arnold. 1997. WWW- IGE:  World Wide 
Web access to Corpora and the Internet Gram- 
mar of English. In Proceedings of DRH-97 (Dig- 
ital Resources in the Humanities), pages 711- 
716, St. Anne's College Oxford, Sept. (abstract: 
http ://users. ox. ac. uk/"talc98/arnold, htm). 
Guy Aston and Lou Burnard. 1997. The BNC 
Handbook: Exploring the British National Cor- 
pus with SARA. Edinburgh University Press, 
Edinburgh. 
Geoff Barnbrook. 1996. Language and Comput- 
ers: a practical introduction to the computer 
analysis of language. Edinburgh Textbooks 
in Empirical Linguistics. Edinburgh University 
Press, Edinburgh. 
Natalia Brines-Moya nd Julie Hartill. 1998. Cri- 
teria for user-oriented evaluation of monolin- 
gual text corpora interfaces. In Proceedings o/ 
the First International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, volume 2, pages 893- 
898, Granada, Spain, 28-30 May. 
Steve Fligelstone. 1993. Some reflections on the 
question of teaching, from a corpus linguistic 
perspective. ICAME Journal, 17:97-109. 
Graeme Kennedy. 1998. An Introduction to Cor- 
pus Linguistics. Studies in Language and Lin- 
guistics. Addison Wesley Longman Ltd, Lon- 
don. 
Geoffrey Leech. 1997. Teaching and language 
corpora: a convergence. In Ann Wichmann, 
Steven Fligelstone, Tony McEnery, and Gerry 
Knowles, editors, Teaching and Language Cor- 
pora, pages 1-23. Addison Wesley Longman, 
Harlow. 
