What  is coreference, and 
what should coreference annotat ion be? 
Kees  van  Deemter  and  Rodger  K ibb le  
ITRI,  University of Brighton 
Lewes Road 
Brighton BN2 4GJ 
United K ingdom 
Kees. van. Deemt er@itri, brighton, ac. uk 
Rodger. Kibble@itri. brighton, a?. uk 
Abst rac t  
In this paper, it is argued that 'coreference an- 
notation', as currently performed in the MUC 
community, goes well beyond annotation of the 
relation of coreference as it is commonly under- 
stood. As a result, it is not always clear what 
semantic relation these annotations are actually 
encoding. The paper discusses a number of in- 
terrelated problems with coreference annotation 
and concludes that rethinking of the coreference 
task is needed before the task can be expanded 
(e.g., to cover part/whole relations) as has re- 
cently been advocated. As a step towards so- 
lution of the problems with coreference anno- 
tation, one possible simplification of the anno- 
tation task is suggested. This strategy can be 
summed up by the phrase "Coreference annota- 
tion should annotate coreference r lations, and 
coreference r lations only". 
1 In t roduct ion :  Core ference  
Annotat ion  
Various practical tasks requiring language tech- 
nology including, for example, information ex- 
traction and text summarization, can be done 
more reliably if it is possible to automatically 
find parts of the text containing information 
about a given topic. For example, if a text sum- 
marizer has to select the most important infor- 
mation, in a given text, about the 1984 Wall 
Street crash, then the summarization task is 
greatly helped if a program can automatically 
spot all the clauses in the text that contain in- 
formation about this crash. To 'train' a pro- 
gram of this kind, extensive language corpora 
have been prepared in which human readers 
have annotated what has been called the coref- 
erence relation. These annotated corpora are 
then used as a 'gold standard' against which 
the program's achievements can be compared. 
The relation of coreference has been defined as 
holding between two noun phrases 1 if they 're- 
fer to the same entity' (Hirschman et al 1997). 
More precisely, let us assume that cq and c~2 are 
occurrences ofnoun phrases (NPs) and let us as- 
sume that both have a unique reference in the 
context in which they occur (i.e., their context 
in the corpus makes them unambiguous). Un- 
der these assumptions we can use a functional 
notation, e.g. Reference(a), as short for 'the 
entity referred to by a' and define (suppressing 
the role of context): 
Definition: ~1 and O~ 2 corefer if and 
only if Reference(a1) = Reference(a2). 
Coreference annotation has been one' focus of 
the 6th and 7th Message Understanding Con- 
ference (MUC-6, MUC-7) and various other an- 
notation exercises (e.g. Davies et al 1998), 
and it has been the topic of a number of sep- 
arate workshops. We will limit the discussion 
to coreference annotations for information ex- 
traction. Because the MUC project is the best- 
known example of this type of coreference an- 
notation, and because of the public availability 
of the MUC Task Definition (TD, MUC 1997), we 
will focus on coreference annotations in MUC. 
It is clear that anaphoric relations are also of po- 
tential relevance for any task that requires text 
interpretation. It follows from the definition of 
coreference, however, that anaphora does not 
equal coreference. Coreference, for example, is a 
symmetrical nd transitive relation, leading to a 
l In  some cases, a restriction to noun phrases and 
nouns  is advocated (e.g. Hirschman et al 1997) but  
it seems that, in practice, the annotat ion can be viewed 
as limited to noun phrases. If all common nouns (e.g. 
'person', 'share price', etc.) were included, the notion of 
coreference would become even more difficult. 
90 
simple partitioning of a set of NPs. 2 Anaphora, 
by contrast, is a nonsymmetrical and nontransi- 
tive relation: if NP1 is anaphoric to NP2 then, 
usually, NP2 is not anaphoric to NP1, for ex- 
ample. Secondly, anaphora involves context- 
sensitivity of interpretation (an anaphoric pro- 
noun, for example, cannot be interpreted with- 
out information about where it occurs), whereas 
a name (W.J.Clinton) and a description (Mrs. 
H.Clinton's husband) can corefer without any 
of the two depending on the other for its inter- 
pretation. Anaphoric and coreferential relations 
can coincide, as is the case with 'pragmatic' pro- 
nouns such as he in W.J. Clinton took the oath; 
then he took a deep breath. The point is just that 
not all coreferential relations are anaphoric, nor 
are all anaphoric relations coreferential. 
The problems that will be pointed out in Section 
2 suggest that coreference and anaphora re not 
properly distinguished in MUC and that this has  
led to a TD that is difficult to understand and 
apply. Four criteria are listed (MUC 97) for the 
MUC TD, in order of priority: 
1. The MUC task should be supported by the 
annotations 
2. Good (defined as 95%) inter-annotator 
agreement should be achievable 
3. It should be possible to annotate texts 
quickly and cheaply 
4. A corpus should be created that can be 
used as a tool for linguists not working on 
the MUC information extraction task 
The TD makes it clear that the annotation 
task has been simplified in a number of ways. 
In particular, only Noun Phrases were anno- 
tated (thereby circumventing problems of null 
anaphora, summation, abstraction, etc., see e.g.  
Kamp & Reyle 1993). Such eminently sensible 
simplifications notwithstanding, we will argue 
that the above-mentioned criteria are extremely 
difficult to achieve. We shall argue that this is 
due to fundamental unclarities in the TD and 
2The somewhat confusing use of the REF feature, in 
SGML-based MUC annotations, which records the 'an- 
tecedent' of a 'referring expression' (MUC 1997) could be 
taken to imply that the notion of coreference r levant for 
MUC is nonsymmetrical, but the explanations elsewhere 
(see e.g. Hirschman et al 1997, and MtJC 1997, Section 
8) make it clear that an equivalence relation is intended. 
we'will suggest hat a rethinking of the coref- 
erence annotation enterprise is in order before 
it ventures into new domains involving speech, 
noisy data, etc., (see e.g. Bagga et al 1999), 
or before it extends the relation of coreference 
to cover whole/part and class/instance r lations 
(e.g. Popescu-Belis 1998, MUC 1997), as has 
been proposed recently. 
2 P rob lems 
In this section, we will discuss what we view 
as some of the most fundamental obstacles for 
coreference annotation. We will explore the im- 
plications of the observation that many NPs do 
not refer (Section 2.1), after which we will move 
on to problems of intensionality (Section 2.2) 
and the issue of determining the 'markables' in 
a corpus (Section 2.3). Some conclusions will 
be drawn in the final section (Section 2.4). 
2.1 Non-referr ing NPs  
When a speaker/writer uses an NP to refer to 
an entity (i:e., either an object of some sort or 
a set of objects), he or she tries to single out 
the entity uniquely. Thus, when someone says 
The owner of this wig is bald, the speaker uses 
the NP The owner of this wig to enable his or 
her audience to determine what person, say Mr. 
X, they are ascribing the property of baldness 
to. Like everything in language, the notion of 
referring is not entirely unproblematic. For ex- 
ample, the speaker's belief that Mr. X owns 
the wig may be mistaken; worse even, nobody 
might own the wig. But, as is recognized in vir- 
tually any semantic theory (for elaboration, see 
e.g. Gamut 1982, Chapter 1), as well as in the 
MUC TD itself, reference is a relatively clear no- 
tion. Especially in the very factual text genres 
targeted in Information Extraction (see the Ap- 
pendix of the present paper for an example), few 
problems are likely to occur. In an annotation 
exercise that has been carried out separate from 
MUC and that will be reported on elsewhere (e.g. 
Poesio et al 1999 for a preliminary report), it 
has been found that the question whether an 
NP refers (based on definitions in Lyons 1977) 
can be answered by annotators with very high 
inter-annotator agreement. 
One thing that is clear about reference is that 
many NPs do not refer. When someone says 
91 
la. No solution emerged from our con- 
versations, or 
lb. A few solutions may emerge from 
our conversations 
the subject NPs do not refer to any single solu- 
tion, nor to any definite set of solutions. They 
have no reference. 3 As a result, the coreference 
relation as defined in Section 1 is inapplicable. 
Nonreferring NPs can stand in various seman- 
tic relations to each other including anaphoric 
relations. For example, the NPa  few solu- 
tions can be embedded in a conditional, saying 
Whenever afew solutions emerged, we embraced 
them. The anaphoric relation between afew so- 
lutions and them cannot be modeled by a theory 
of reference. Instead, a variable binding account 
may be employed to reflect that two sets of en- 
tities must co-vary: the set of any solutions that 
emerged at a given moment and the set of any 
solutions that we embraced at that moment. Of 
course, it would be possible to ask annotators to 
annotate anaphoric relations, in which case one 
would need to explain what anaphora is. This 
would be a substantial task which would require 
the writing of a new TD 4. 
For the reasons ketched above, NPs of the fol- 
lowing types do not refer: 
? Quantifying NPs (e.g. 'Every man', 'Most 
computational linguists' (MUC 97)) 
? Most occurrences of Indefinite NPs (e.g., '/ 
don't have a machete' (MUC 97), 'Do you 
own a machete?~ 
? Predicative NPs ('... became (president 
of Dreamy Detergents)', (MUC 97, see also 
aOf course, an NP like 'no solution' has a meaning, 
but 'having the same meaning' is different from corefer- 
ence. For example, in Mary is married to a nice man 
and Sue is also married to a nice man, both occurrences 
of a nice man have the same meaning, but one would 
expect hem to refer to different individuals. 
4Sometimes the term 'co-specification' has been used 
to replace coreference by a wider notion which subsumes 
at least some types of anaphora including, specifically, 
the use of pragmatic pronouns (e.g. Sidner 1983). Co- 
specification, however, is not  an intuitively clear notion 
either - what does it mean for an expression to 'specify' 
something? - and no definition of it that would be useful 
to annotators i known to us. In particular, it is unclear 
whether a bound anaphor and its antecedent co-specify, 
or how the notion should be applied to intensional con- 
structions (see Section 2.2). 
Section 2.2)) 
A 'substitution' test can be used to confirm that 
NPs that stand in anaphoric relations to NPs of 
these types do not corefer with them. For in- 
stance~ one may observe that Every man loves 
his mother does not mean the same as Every 
man loves every man's mother, contrasting with 
referring NPs, which do allow such substitutions 
(e.g., John loves his mother equals John loves 
John's mother). 5 
So, substantial classes of NPs do not refer, and 
consequently they cannot corefer. Yet, MUC'S 
annotators have been asked to mark NPs of 
each of the above-mentioned categories and to 
let them 'corefer' with other NPs. So clearly, 
the relation annotated in MUC - let's call it 
the IDENT relation, following (MUC 97) - differs 
sharply from the coreference relation. The TD 
admits that certain instructions may be incom- 
patible with the definition of coreference but no 
reason is given for these incompatibilities and 
no intuitive motivation for the relation IDENT is 
offered. The annotator is left with a long series 
of instructions which fail to be held together by 
a common rationale. 
2.2 Intensionality (and text-asserted 
identity) 
The coreference annotation community is well 
aware of some of the problems with the TD. The 
problem that has received most of their atten- 
tion is the problem of intensionality (Hirschman 
et al 1997). This awareness has led to consid- 
erable complexities in the relevant parts of the 
TD. For example, in Section 1.3 of MUC (1997), 
where the implications of 'change over time' are 
considered, where the example the stock price 
fell from $4. OP to $3.85 is discussed, the instruc- 
tions tell annotators to consider the stock price 
as standing in the IDENT relation with $3.85 but 
not with $4.02, for the reason that $3.85 is 'the 
more recent value'. Quite reasonably, $4.02 is 
not considered to stand in the IDENT relation 
with the stock price because transitivity would 
lead to the conclusion that $4.02 and $3.85 are 
equal. The first question this raises is, what 
STests of this kind could be offered to annotators to 
simplify their task. Space does not allow their exact 
formulation, since qualifications are needed to account 
for NPs in attitude contexts and for specifically used 
indefinites. 
92 
happens if the next sentence asserts that, later 
on, the price fell even lower? 
2. (a) The stock price fell from $3.0P 
to $3.85; (b) Later that day, it fell to 
an even lower value, at $3.82. 
Does the annotator have to go back to (a), de- 
ciding that $3.82 is an even more recent value 
and the stock price does not stand in the IDENT 
relation with $3.85 after all? 
Later parts of the TD contradict what is said 
in Section 1.3. Section 6.4 tells annotators that 
'Two markables hould be recorded as corefer- 
ential if the text asserts them to be coreferential 
at any time'. Accordingly, in 
3. Henry Higgins, who was formerly 
sales director of Sudsy Soaps, became 
president of Dreamy Detergents, 
annotators are asked to mark (1) Henry Hig- 
gins, (2) sales director of Sudsy Soaps, and (3) 
president of Dreamy Detergents as standing in 
the IDENT relation. But, by the same reason- 
ing as above, this implies that Henry Higgins 
is presently the sales director of Sudsy Soaps 
as well as the president of Dreamy Detergents, 
which is not what the text asserts. Clearly, this 
is not a sensible instruction either. 
As in the case of non-referring NPs (Section 
2.1), the root of the trouble lies in the fact 
that the relatively clear (but limited) notion of 
coreference is extendedto ne that aims to be 
applicable in a wider class of cases, but which 
is no longer clear. On linguistic grounds, Two 
strategies could be used to solve the problem. 
One would be to exclude predicatively used 
NPs from entering coreference relations and to 
leave their analysis to other MUC tasks. The 
other, more sophisticated strategy, consistent 
with Dowty et al (1981), would be to say that, 
in cases like this, The stock price refers, not 
to a number (such as the number $3.85) but 
to a Montague-type individual concept (Dowty 
et al 1981), that is, a function from times 
to numbers. It would have followed that The 
stock price does not corefer with either $4.02 or 
$3.85 and no problem would have arisen. Anal- 
ogously, president of Dreamy Detergents, in the 
context cited above, would denote an individual 
concept rather than an individual. If the next 
sentence goes on the say He died within a week, 
he would be marked as coreferential with Henry 
Higgins; if, instead, the text proceeds aying 
This is an influential position, but the pay is 
lousy, then this would be marked as coreferen- 
tial with president of Dreamy Detergents. It is 
possible that this second strategy would be ask- 
ing rather too much from annotators, in which 
case the first strategy would be preferable. 
2.3 Markab les  
Experience with the coreference task has shown 
that it is surprisingly difficult, and this has been 
tackled by breaking it down into more manage- 
able subtasks. The emerging practice (recom- 
mended by Hirschman et al 1997) is to sep- 
arate annotation into a two-stage process: an- 
notation of markables is to be carried out be- 
fore linking coreferring elements. This means 
that the coreference task becomes a matter of 
partitioning the set of markables into equiva- 
lence classes, which may be interpreted as cor- 
responding to 'discourse referents' (cf. Popescu- 
Belis and Robba 1998). It turns out, however, 
that the distinction between marking up and 
linking is not strictly followed even in the MUC-7 
specification. Certain elements are only marked 
up if they corefer with an existing mark, able: 
these include conjuncts and prenominal modi- 
fiers. In the following example, the first occur- 
rence of aluminum is markable as it 'corefers' 
with the occurrence of this noun as a bare NP 
in the second clause. 
4. The price of aluminum siding has 
steadily increased, as the market for 
aluminum reacts to the strike in Chile. 
Bare nouns in modifier position are not said to 
be marl(able unless there is a coreference rela- 
tion of this type. 
There are various ways one could address these 
difficulties. One possibility is to explicitly sep- 
arate out the task of marking up all elements 
which might participate in coreference. How- 
ever, this approach will increase the complexity 
of the task, which is likely to become unmanage- 
able if the scheme is extended to cover "discon- 
tinuous elements, including conjoined elements" 
as suggested in Section 1.4. Consider the exam- 
ple (emphasis added): 
93 
5. Oestradiol is a form o-f oestrogen; 
norethisterone acetate is a progesto- 
gen. 
They belong to a group of medicines 
known as Hormone Replacement 
Therapy (HRT). (ABPI 1997) 
The problem here is that the antecedent of They 
is the conjunction of Oestradiol and norethis- 
terone acetate, which doesn't appear as a con- 
tiguous sequence in the text. This relation can 
be annotated by adding new tags for composite 
referring expressions, but it is obviously unde- 
sirable to encode these tags in advance for every 
possible combination ofreferents in a text, since 
the number would increase xponentially with 
the number of "basic" referring expressions. 
An extreme alternative is to have a first pass 
where only referring expressions which look like 
anaphors are marked up, such as pronouns, def- 
inite NPs and reduced forms of proper names. 
Subsequent passes would look for antecedents 
for these expressions and link coreferring ele- 
ments. An intermediate approach would be to 
mark up a "core" set of referring expressions on 
the first pass, allowing for further eferring ex- 
pressions to be identified on subsequent passes 
if this is necessary to resolve coreference. The 
extent to which each of these strategies would 
contribute to accuracy and speed of annotation 
remains to be determined, but it seems unreal- 
istic to expect great benefits from any of them. 
Beyond the noun phrase.  It has been sug- 
gested above that the scope of the coreference 
task might better be restricted to cases of 'strict' 
coreference involving NPs. This would be com- 
patible in the longer term with extending the 
domain of the task to cover abstract objects 
such as events, when they are not described 
using an NP. When analysing naturally occur- 
ring text one often finds pronouns and full NPs 
which refer back in some way to the content of 
a clause, as in the following example: 
6. Bates had crashed an F-14 into the 
Pacific during a routine training flight 
in April. Navy o\]:~cials blamed him -for 
causing the accident... 
This is a clear case of coreference, where two 
expressions refer to a well-defined event. Cases 
like this are currently excluded from the MUC 
coreference task, which limits itself to relations 
between NPs. On the other hand, they are on 
the "wish list" in Section 1.4, "Future Direc- 
tions" and, from the point of view of Informa- 
tion Extraction, it is obviously desirable to in- 
corporate reference to events. If and when this 
is done, the problems that were noted above will 
be exacerbated. In particular, difficulties arise if 
the strategy of identifying markables in advance 
is maintained, since it is difficult to determine 
which types of elements can serve as antecedents 
(ABPI 1997): 
7. Be careful not to get the gel in your 
eyes 
I-f this happens, rinse your eyes with 
clean water and tell your doctor. 
8. The label will tell you how much to 
use and how often. 
This will usually be two or three times 
a day. 
To sum up, the news from this quarter is both 
good and bad. There are clear cases of event 
coreference which can be incorporated into the 
coreference task. On the other hand, exist- 
ing problems with annotation of NPs will be 
made worse since annotators will be confronted 
with some difficult problems both in identifying 
markables and deciding on coreference links. 
3 Conc lus ion  
Based on the above, we would like to argue 
that current 'coreference annotation' practice, 
as exemplified by MUC, has over-extended itself, 
mixing elements of coreference with element? of 
anaphora in unclear ways. As a result, the anno- 
tated corpus that is likely to emerge from MUC 
may not be very useful for the research com- 
munity outside MUC (Criterion 4), the more so 
because generalization to other subject domains 
is likely to make problems worse. For example, 
in many domains, there axe other sources of in- 
tensionality than just change over time. 
Let us briefly return to the other success crite- 
ria mentioned in MUC (1997). It would seem 
that the current MUC Task Definition is al- 
ready rather complex, to the point where it be- 
comes doubtful that it can be applied quickly 
and cheaply (Criterion 3). Indeed, one has to 
ask whether it can be applied with a sufficient 
94 
degree of accuracy, even given plenty of time. 
Hirschberg et al (1997), when discussing this 
question, note that inter-annotator agreement 
(Criterion 2) at the time of writing, was in the 
low eighties. The material in Section 2 suggests 
that this relative lack of success is no accident 
and that unclarities and internal inconsistencies 
stand in the way of success. 
A separate issue that has been discussed in Sec- 
tion 2.3 is the identification of 'markables'. A
clear separation between (1) the task of mark- 
ing all the markables and (2) that of annotat- 
ing coreference r lations between markables ap- 
pears to be difficult to uphold. Consequently, 
one has to ask whether the coreference task can 
be made easier by finding a more effective sepa- 
ration of subtasks. This becomes even more ur- 
gent if generalization to other phenomena than 
relations between NPs, as has recently been ad- 
vocated, are contemplated. 
Given this situation, we suggest that coreference 
annotation might do well to restrict itself to an- 
notation of the coreference r lation, as defined 
in MUC (1997) and Hirschman et a1.(1997) (See 
our Section 1). Instead of the IDENT relation 
practiced in MUC, annotation of the coreference 
relation promises better chances for success. If 
this strategy were adopted, annotation would 
become a more modest enterprise, which would 
provide its consumers with information that is 
smaller in volume but more reliable in quality. 
(For an example, see Appendix.) 
In conclusion, it appears that there is scope 
for new collaboration between the coreference 
annotation community and the computational 
semantics community. The present paper at- 
tempts to be a small step in this direction. 
APPENDIX  
To show that, in the text genre targeted by 
MUC, not much is lost if annotation is lim- 
ited to coreference as defined in Section 1, we 
took an excerpt of a MUC-6 Wall Street Jour- 
nal article, precisely as it was rendered and an- 
notated in MUC (1997), Appendix A, where it 
was used as an extended 'sample annotation' 
of non-dialogue annotation. Reflecting the 'offi- 
cial' view (see Section 1), according to which 
only the partitioning into equivalence classes 
matters, we simplify the notation by printing 
a number following the NP that it annotates. 
Thus, NPs that are followed by the same num- 
ber stand in the IDENT relation (Section 2.1): 
Ocean Drilling & Exploration Co.(l) will 
sell its(l) contract-drilling business(2), 
and took a $50.9 million loss from discon- 
tinued operations in the third quarter(3) 
because of the planned sale. 
The New Orleans oil and gas exploration 
and diving operations company(l) added 
that it(l) doesn't expect any further ad- 
verse financial impact from the restructur- 
ing. 
In the third quarter(3), the company(l), 
which is 61%-owned by Murphy Oil Corp. 
of Arkansas, had a net loss of(4) $46.9 mil- 
lion(4), or 91 cents a share(4). 
It has long been rumored that Ocean 
Drilling(l) would sell the unit(2) to con- 
centrate on its(l) core oil and gas business. 
The annotation shows a partitioning into four 
non-singleton sets of NPs: 7 NPs in class (1) 
(the company), 2 in class (2) (the contract- 
drilling business, 2 in class (3) (the third quar- 
ter), and 3 in class (4) (the loss). 
It is easy to see how the text would be anno- 
tated using the notion of ('strict') coherence ad- 
vocated in Section 2. Each of the above-defined 
classes except (4) are coreference r lations, and 
consequently they would be annotated in the 
exact same way if only coreference were anno- 
tated. The only difference is class (4), and this 
class exemplifies the problems discussed in sec- 
tion 2.2. We conclude that, for this text, the 
only MUC annotations that are not inherited by 
'strict' coreference are questionable. 
In addition, it may be noted that the most im- 
portant links that are missed by both annota- 
tion schemes concern the use of which, which 
refers to the company, and various references 
to the selling/restructuring of the division (e.g., 
the planned sale, the restructuring). Both are 
coreferential relationships that could be covered 
by extensions of an annotation scheme based on 
'strict' coreference (see Section 2.3). 
Acknowledgements  
The authors wish to thank the following for 
helpful feedback on earlier drafts of this pa- 
95 
per: Adam Kilgarriff, Richard Power, Paul Pi- 
wek and colleagues in the GNOME project. 
Kibble's work was funded by the UK EPSRC 
as part of this project under grant reference 
GR/L51126. 
L i te ra ture  
ABPI (1997). 1996-1997 ABPI Compendium of 
Patient Information Leaflets. Association of 
the British Pharmaceutical Industry. 
BAGGA i .  ET AL. (1999). Coreference and 
its Applications. Call for papers for workshop 
associated with ACL'99. See 
www. ca. duke. edu/~amit/ac199-wkshp, html 
MUC (1997). MUC-7 Coreference Task Defini- 
tion, 13 July 1997. See www.muc.saic.com 
DAVIES S. ET AL. (1998). Anno- 
tating Coreference in Dialogues: Pro- 
posal for a scheme for MATE. See 
www. cogsci, ed. ac. uk/-,~poesio/MATE/anno_man- 
ual. html 
DOWTY D. ET AL. (1981). DoTty, D., Wall, 
R. & Peters, S. Introduction to Montague 
Semantics. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
GAMUT L. T. F. (1991). Logic, Language 
and Meaning Volume 2. Chicago and London: 
University of Chicago Press. 
HIRSCHMAN L., ROBINSON P., BURGER J. 
& VILAIN M. (1997). Automating Corefer- 
ence: The Role of Annotated Training Data. 
In Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium 
on Applying Machine Learning to Discourse 
? Processing. 
KAMP H. & REYLE U. (1993). From Dis- 
course to Logic. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.? 
LYONS J. (1977). Semantics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
POESIO, M., R. HENSCHEL, J. HITZEMAN, 
R. KIBBLE, S. MONTAGUE, AND K. VAN 
DEEMTER. (1999). Towards an Annotation 
Scheme for Noun Phrase Generation. To 
appear in H. Uszkoreit et al (eds), EACL-99 
Workshop on Linguistically Interpreted Cor- 
pora, Bergen. 
POPESCU-BELIS A. (1998). How Corpora with 
Annotated Coreference Links Improve Refer- 
ence Resolution. In R. ANTONIO ET AL., Eds., 
First Int. Conf. on Language Resources and 
Evaluation, p. 567-572. Granada: European 
Language Resources Association. 
POPESCU-BELIS A. & ROBBA I. (1998). Three 
New Methods for Evaluating Reference Reso- 
lution. In First International Conference on 
Language Resources 8J Evaluation: Workshop 
on Linguistic Coreference. Granada: European 
Language Resources Association. 
SIDNER C. (1983). Focusing in the com- 
prehension of definite anaphora. InM.Brady 
and R.Berwick eds. Computational Models of 
Discourse. Cambridge, Mass:MIT Press. 
96 
