Text-Translation Alignment: 
Three Languages Are Better Than Two * 
Miche l  S imard  
Laboratoire de recherche appliqu4e n linguistique informatique (RALI) 
Universit4 de Montr6al 
S imardM?IRO. UMontreal. CA 
Abst rac t  
In this article, we show how a bilingual text- 
translation alignment method can be adapted 
to deal with more than two versions of a text. 
Experiments on a trilingual corpus demonstrate 
that this method yields better bilingual align- 
ments than can be obtained with bilingual text- 
alignment methods. Moreover, for a given num- 
ber of texts, the computational complexity of 
the multilingual method is the same as for bilin- 
gual alignment. 
Introduction 
While bilingual text corpora have been part of 
the computational linguistics cene for over ten 
years now, we have recently witnessed the ap- 
pearance of text corpora containing versions of 
texts in three or more languages, uch as those 
developed within the CRATER (McEnery et 
al., 1997), MULTEXT (Ide and V4ronis, 1994) 
and MULTEXT-EAST (Erjavec and Ide, 1998) 
projects. Access to this type of corpora raises 
a number of questions: Do they make new ap- 
plications possible? Can methods developed for 
handling bilingual texts be applied to multilin- 
gual texts? More generally: is there anything to 
gain in viewing multilingual documents as more 
than just multiple pairs of translations? 
Bilingual alignments have so far shown that 
they can play multiple roles in a wide range 
of linguistic applications, uch as computer as- 
sisted translation (Isabelle et al, 1993; Brown 
et al, 1990), terminology (Dagan and Church, 
1994) lexicography (Langlois, 1996; Klavans 
and Tzoukermann, 1995; Melamed, 1996), and 
cross-language information retrieval (Nie et al, 
* This research was funded by the Canadian De- 
partment of Foreign Affairs and International Trade 
(h t tp : / /~ .d fa i t -maec i .gc .ca / ) ,  via the Agence de 
la francophonie (h t tp : / /~ .  franeophonie, orE) 
1998). However, the case for trilingual and mul- 
tilingual alignments i not as clear. True multi- 
lingual resources uch as multilingual glossaries 
are not widely used, and most of the time, when 
such resources exist, the real purpose is usually 
to provide bilingual resources for multiple pairs 
of languages in a compact way. 
What we intend to show here is that while 
multilingual correspondences may not be inter- 
esting in themselves, multilingual text align- 
ment techniques can be useful as a means of 
extracting information on bilingual correspon- 
dences. Our idea is that each additional version 
of a text should be viewed as valuable informa- 
tion that can be used to produce better align- 
ments. In other words: whatever the intended 
application, three languages are better than two 
(and, more generally: the more languages, the 
merrier!). 
After going through some definitions and pre- 
liminary material (Section 1), we present a gen- 
eral method for aligning three versions of a text 
(Section 2). We then describe some experiments 
that were carried out to evaluate this approach 
(Section 3) and various possible optimizations 
(Section 4). Finally, we report on some disturb- 
ing experiments (Section 5), and conclude with 
directions for future work. 
1 T r i l ingua l  A l ignments  
There are various ways in which the concept of 
alignment can be formalized. Here, we choose 
to view alignments as mathematical relations 
between linguistic entities: 
Given two texts, A and B, seen as sets of 
linguistic units: A = {al,a2,...,am} and B = 
{bl, b2, ...,bn}, we define a binary alignment 
XAB as a relation on A tj B: 
XAB={(al,bl),(a2,b2),(a2,b3),...} 
2 
The interpretation of XAB is: (a, b) belongs to 
XAB if and only if some translation equivalence 
exists between a and b, total or partial. 
This definition of alignment, inspired from 
Kay and RSscheisen (1993), can be naturally ex- 
tended to accommodate any number of versions 
of a text. In general, we will say that, given 
N versions of a text A1,...,AN, a N- l ingual  
alignment XA~ is a relation on UiN=iAi. 
Clearly, a N-lingual alignment can be ob- 
tained by combining pairwise bilingual align- 
ments. For example, with three texts A, B and 
C, and three alignments XAB, XBC and XCA, 
one can easily obtain the trilingual alignment 
XABC as XAB U XBC U XCA. In fact, in all 
that follows, we indifferently refer to trilingual 
alignments as unique relations or as triples of 
bilingual alignments. Conversely, any smaller- 
degree alignment can be extracted as a subset 
of a N-lingual alignment, by projecting the re- 
lation onto a given "plane". 
Another thing that becomes apparent as soon 
as more than two languages are involved is that 
text-translation alignments appear to be equiva- 
lence relations, which means that they generally 
display the properties of reflexivity, symmetry 
and transitivity: 
? reflexivity: Any word or sequence of 
words aligns with itself-  which is natural, 
insofar as we extend the notion of "transla- 
tion", so as to include the translation from 
one language to itself... 
? symmetry :  if a in language A is aligned 
with b in language B, then we expect b to 
align with a. In other words, alignment is 
not "directional". 
? t ransi t iv i ty:  if a aligns with b, and if b 
itself aligns with c, then a aligns with c. 
Although there are limits to the applicability of 
these mathematical properties to real-life trans- 
lations, the case of transitivity is particularly 
interesting, as we will see later on. 
Translation equivalences can be viewed at dif- 
ferent levels of resolution, from the level of docu- 
ments to those of structural divisions (chapters, 
sections, etc.), paragraphs, sentences, words, 
morphemes and eventually, characters. In gen- 
eral, it seems quite clear that the smaller the 
units, the more interesting an alignment is likely 
to be (although we can question the interest of a 
character-level alignment). However, in the ex- 
periments described here, we focus on alignment 
at the level of sentences, this for a number of 
reasons: First, sentence alignments have so far 
proven their usefulness in a number of appli- 
cations, e.g. bilingual exicography (Langlois, 
1996; Klavans and Tzoukermann, 1995; Da- 
gan and Church, 1994), automatic translation 
verification (Macklovitch, 1995; Macklovitch, 
1996) and the automatic acquisition of knowl- 
edge about translation (Brown et al, 1993). 
Also, the sentence alignment problem has been 
widely studied, and we could even say that at 
this point in time, a certain consensus exists re- 
garding how the problem should be approached. 
On the other hand, not only is the com- 
putation of finer-resolution alignments, such 
as phrase- or word-level alignments, a much 
more complex operation, it also raises a num- 
ber of difficult problems related to evaluation 
(Melamed, 1998), which we wanted to avoid, at 
least at this point. Finally, we believe that the 
concepts, methods and results discussed here 
can be applied just as well to alignments at 
other levels of resolution. 
2 A General Method for Aligning 
Mul t ip le  Vers ions  o f  a Text  
Existing alignment Mgorithms that rely on the 
optimality principle and dynamic programming 
to find the best possible sentence alignment, 
such as those of Gale and Church (1991), Brown 
et al (1991), Simard et al (1992), Chen (1993), 
Langlais and E1-B~ze (1997), Simard and Pla- 
mondon (1998), etc. can be naturally extended 
to deal with three texts instead of two, or more 
generally to deal with N texts. While the res- 
olution of the bilingual problem is analogous to 
finding an optimal path in a rectangular ma- 
trix, aligning N texts is analogous to the same 
problem, this time in a N-dimensional matrix. 
Normally, these methods produce alignments in 
the form of parallel segmentations of the texts 
into equal numbers of segments. These segmen- 
tations are such that 1) segmentation points co- 
incide with sentence boundaries and 2) the k th 
segment of one text and the k th segment of all 
others are mutual translations. We refer to such 
alignments as non-crossing alignments ( ee Fig- 
ure 1 for an example). 
3 
La vraie question posde par cet te  controverse est la suivante: ? 
qu'est ce que la pensde? ? 
Elle mystifie l'humanitd (seule, apparemment, k pouvoir penser)  
depuis des milldnalres. ? 
Des ordinateurs qui ne pensent pas ont cependant  rdorientd la 
question et ~limin~ diverses rdponses. ? 
La vraie rdponse reste eependant  inconnue.  ? 
L'esprit est-il un programme d'ordinateur? ? 
JOHN SEARLE ? 
Non : 1" 
un programme manipule seulement  des symboles, mais le 
cerveau leur donne un sens. ? 
Behind this debate lies the question, What does it 'mean to 
think? ? 
The issue has intr igued peop le  (the only entities known to 
think) for millennia. ? 
Computers  that  so far do not think have given the question a 
new slant and struck clown many candidate answers. ? 
A definitive one remains to be found. ? 
Is the brain's Mind a Computer Program?? ? 
NO. 
A program merely manipulates ymbols, whereas a brain at- 
taches meaning to them. ? 
by John It. Searle ? 
Figure 1: Bilingual Non-crossing Sentence Alignment - "?" 's denote sentence boundaries; horizontal 
lines represent segmentation points. 
This definition covers a subset of alignments 
as defined in Section 1. It is therefore always 
possible to represent a non-crossing alignment 
as an equivalence relation. However, the con- 
verse is not true: in particular, and as their 
name suggests, one cannot explicitly represent 
inversions with such alignments, i.e. situations 
where the order of sentences i  not preserved 
across translation. In spite of this limitation, 
these alignments cover the vast majority of sit- 
uations encountered in real-life texts, at least at 
the level of sentences (Gale and Church, 1991). 
There is a problem with extending this class 
of alignment algorithms to deal with the gen- 
eral N-dimensional case, however: the compu- 
tational complexity of the algorithm increases 
multiplicatively with each new language. For 
instance, the space and time complexity of the 
trilingual version of the Gale and Church (1991) 
program would be O(N3). The use of such an 
algorithm quickly becomes prohibitive (for ex- 
ample: 1,000,000 computation steps for texts 
of 100 sentences each). Of course, in the case 
of bilingual alignment, it is common practice 
to restrict the search, for instance to a narrow 
corridor along the main "diagonal" (see Simard 
and Plamondon (1998), for example). But even 
with such heuristics, it is quite clear that in gen- 
eral, the search-space will grow multiplicatively 
with each new language. 
Nevertheless, the idea of aligning multiple 
versions of a text simultaneously is intuitively 
appealing: while the alignment operation will 
no doubt be more complex than with two lan- 
guages, every new version brings some addi- 
tional information, which we should be able to 
make good use of (see Figure 2). Therefore, we 
will want to find a way to overcome the com- 
plexity issues. 
We know that the multilingual alignment 
problem is related to a number of other sequence 
a2 / " J  c2 
Figure 2: Three texts are easier to align than 
two - In the face of an uncertainty regarding 
correspondences between b2, Cl and c2: the ab- 
sence of evidence for (a2,cl) or (al, b2) corre- 
spondences suggests rejecting (b2, cl), while a 
similar reasoning supports (b2, c~). 
comparison problems, with applications in var- 
ious domains. In particular, molecular biolo- 
gists are concerned with relating sequences of 
nucleotides (in DNA or RNA molecules) and 
of amino acids (in proteins) (Sternberg, 1996). 
The methods used to attack these problems 
are very similar to those used in translation 
alignment, and rely largely on dynamic pro- 
gramming. In practice, researchers in molec- 
ular biology have observed that, insofar as the 
input sequences axe not excessively dissimilar, 
the greater the number of sequences, the better 
the alignments obtained. Therefore, numerous 
strategies have been proposed to alleviate the 
complexity issues related to multiple sequence 
comparison (Chan et al, 1992). One common 
heuristic approach is to reduce the search-space, 
either in width (i.e. by concentrating the search 
around the "diagonal"), or in depth (i.e. by 
4 
first segmenting the input sequences atjudicious 
points, and then aligning the subsequences). Of
course, these strategies are also widely used in 
text-translation alignment. 
However, the most widespread approach is 
to construct multiple alignments by iteratively 
combining smaller-degree alignments. While 
these methods are not generally optimal, they 
still produce good results in most situations. 
More importantly, for a given number of se- 
quences, they usually work in quadratic time 
and space. The general idea is to first com- 
pare sequences two-by-two, so as to measure 
their pairwise similarity; based on the result of 
this operation, an order of alignment is deter- 
mined - -  typically, the most similar pairs will be 
aligned first; the final multiple alignment is pro- 
duced by gradually combining alignments (see, 
for example, Barton and Sternberg (1987)). 
This approach can be directly adapted to the 
trilingual text alignment problem. The idea is 
simple: given three versions of a text A, B and 
C, in three different languages, we first deter- 
mine which of the three pairs AB, BC or AC 
is the most "similar". Let us suppose that this 
is the AB pair. We then align this pair, using 
whatever bilingual alignment program we have 
at hand, producing XAB; we then align text C 
with this alignment, hus producing XABC. 
To implement this idea, we need to answer 
two questions: First, how to measure the simi- 
larity between different versions of a text? And 
second, what does it mean to align a text with 
an alignment? 
There are certainly numerous possible an- 
swers to the first question. But actually, statis- 
tical alignment methods uch as those derived 
from Gale and Church (1991) provide us with 
a simple solution: to find the best alignment, 
these methods explore different alignment hy- 
potheses, and select the one with the highest 
probability with regard to a certain statistical 
model of translation. Therefore, at the end of 
the operation, a statistical alignment program 
has at its disposal an overall score for the best 
alignment, in the form of a global probability. 
In practice, we observe that this score is a good 
indicator of the similarity between two texts. 
For instance, Gale and Church used this score 
to identify dubious regions in their alignments 1. 
1Also recall that the dynamic programming approach 
Therefore, to determine the most similar pair 
of texts, we propose to compute the bilingual 
alignments XAB, XBC and XAC, and to com- 
pare the final alignment scores. Of course, for 
this exercise to be meaningful, we must make 
sure that the scores associated with the bilin- 
gual alignments are indeed comparable. In gen- 
eral, if the same alignment method is used with 
comparable translation models for all pairs of 
languages, this should not be a problem. 
Once the most similar pair of versions has 
been identified, say A and B, and we have com- 
puted a bilingual alignment for that pair, we 
are ready to tackle the problem of aligning the 
remaining text C with the XAB alignment. In 
practice, this will amount to aligning the ele- 
ments of C (in our case, sentences) with indi- 
vidual "couples" of the XAB relation: whenever 
we align some sentence c E C with a sentence 
a E A, then this implies that c must also be 
aligned with all other sentences to which a is 
related within the transitive closure of XAB. In 
other words, this alignment method is "inher- 
ently transitive". 
In practice, the alignment of XAB and C 
is dealt with just like a bilingual alignment: 
the XAB alignment is viewed as a sequence of 
items, and dynamic programming is used to 
find the best alignment with the sentences of 
C. The only real difference lies in how individ- 
ual "triples" are scored. Here again, we turn 
to molecular biology, where experience seems 
to show that the "joint similarity" of multiple 
items can be measured as the linear combina- 
tion of all pairwise comparisons: 
s(al,...,aN) = Z s(ai, aj) 
i<j 
This sort of combination supposes that all bi- 
nary scoring functions (ai, aj) are comparable 
(Carillo and Lipman, 1988). Once again, this 
will not be a problem if we plan to use analo- 
gous translation models for all language pairs. 
To sum up, given three versions of a text A, 
B and C, we propose the following trilingual 
alignment method: 
1. Compute initial bilingual alignments XAB, 
to text alignment actually derives from a classic algo- 
rithm to measure the "edit distance" between two strings 
(Wagner and Fischer, 1974) 
5 
XBC and XAC; 
2. Using the final alignment score, identify the 
most similar pair (say, AB); 
3. Align the remaining text (C) with the ini- 
tial alignment of the retained pair (XAB); 
the result is a trilingual alignment XABC; 
The computational complexity of this method 
is essentially the same as that of the underlying 
bilingual alignment method, both in terms of 
time and space. In practice, aligning three texts 
this way takes about the same amount of mem- 
ory as aligning one pair, and about four times 
as much computation time. 
3 Eva luat ion  
We have implemented a trilingual sentence- 
alignment program called trial, based on the ap- 
proach presented in Section 2 and on a bilingual 
sentence-alignment program called sfial, which 
implements a modified version of the method of 
Simard et al (1992). In sfial, we essentially 
combine into a statistical framework two crite- 
ria: the length-similarity criterion proposed by 
Gale and Church (1991) and a "graphemic re- 
semblance" criterion based on the existence of 
cognate words between languages. This method 
was chosen because it is simple, it requires a 
minimum of language-specific knowledge, and 
because it is representative of the kind of ap- 
proaches that are typically used for this task, 
at least for aligning between closely-related lan- 
guages uch as German, English, French, Span- 
ish, etc. Furthermore, in a recent sentence- 
alignment "competition" held within the AR- 
CADE project (Langlais et al, 1998), the three 
top-ranking systems relied at least partially on 
cognates, and two of them were derived irectly 
from the Simard et al (1992) method. 
To test the performance of the trial pro- 
gram, we needed a performance metric and a 
test corpus. Following the work of the AR- 
CADE project, we decided to measure perfor- 
mance in terms of alignment recall, precision 
and F-measure, computed on the basis of sen- 
tence lengths (measured in terms of characters). 
In our experience, this set of metrics is the most 
generally useful. 
Our test corpus was The Gospel Accord- 
ing to John, in English (New International 
Version), French (Louis Segond translation) 
Languages 
Spanish precision 
-French recall 
F 
French precision 
-English recall 
F 
English 
-Spanish 
precision 
recall 
F 
sfial 
0.997 
0.989 
0.993 
0.956 
0.941 
0.948 
0.952 
0.936 
0.944 
trial 
0.997 
0.989 
0.993 
0.962 
0.941 
0.951 
0.950 
0.943 
0.947 
Table 1: Precision, recall and F-measure of 
alignments produced by sfial and trial, on The 
Gospel According to John, French, English and 
Spanish versions. 
and Spanish (Reina Valera version). All ver- 
sions were obtained via the Bible Gateway 
(http: / /uvw.gospelcom.net) .  For the needs 
of the evaluation, we manually segmented all 
three versions of the text into sentences, and 
then produced reference sentence alignments, 
using the Manual system (Simard, 1998c). This 
corpus and its preparation axe described in more 
details in Simard (1998a). 
The test-corpus was submitted to both sfial 
and trial; the results of this experiment are re- 
produced in Table 1. The Spanish-French pair 
was identified by trial as being the most similar 
(not surprisingly, English-Spanish was the most 
dissimilar). Since the alignment of the most 
similar pair is used as the basis of the trilingual 
alignment, he results obtained by sfial and trial 
for this pair are identical. On the other hand, 
for the two other pairs, the trial method seems 
to improve the quality of the alignments, but 
the gains are minimal. 
A close examination of the results quickly 
reveals what is going on here: As mentioned 
earlier, our trilingual alignment method is "in- 
herently transitive"; in fact, it naturally pro- 
duces alignments which are transitively closed. 
In doing so, it sometimes run into some natural 
limitations of the applicability of transitivity to 
real-life translations. Take the following exam- 
ple: suppose that the word weak in an English 
text is rendered in French as sans force ("with- 
out strength") and in Spanish as sin fortaleza. 
A transitively closed trilingual alignment will 
contain the correct correspondences (sans, sin) 
and (force, fortaleza), but also the correspon- 
6 
Languages 
French precision 
-English recall 
F 
English precision 
-Spanish recall 
F 
before after 
0.962 0.979 
0.941 0.938 
0.951 0.958 
0.950 0.970 
0.943 0.938 
0.947 0.954 
Table 2: Impact of re-segmenting couples in- 
volving more than a single pair of sentences in 
the alignment produced by trial. 
dences (sans, fortaleza) and (force, sin), which 
are superfluous. Such contractions and expan- 
sions happen all the time in real-life transla- 
tions, not only at the level of words, but at the 
level of sentences as well. As a result, transi- 
tively closed alignments of three texts or more 
will usually display a lower precision than bilin- 
gual alignments. 
To compensate for this "transitivity noise", 
we decided to apply a final post-processing step: 
for each pair of languages, whenever the trilin- 
gual alignment produced by trial connects two 
pairs of sentences or more, we evaluate the im- 
pact of re-segmenting the corresponding region 
of text (in other words, we perform a local bilin- 
gual alignment). Typically, this operation can 
be carried out in near-linear time and space. 
Table 2 shows the impact of this procedure on 
the trial alignments of The Gospel According to 
? John (the initial bilingual alignment is not sub- 
mitted to re-alignment, and so the results for 
the French-Spanish pair is not reproduced here). 
What we observe is a significant improvement of 
precision, and a slight decrease in recall. Com- 
pared to the sfial bilingual alignment, he over- 
all improvement (F-measure) is approximately 
1%: all figures being in the 0.95 area, this cor- 
responds to a 20% reduction in the total error. 
Therefore, it would indeed seem that our final 
post-processing is effective, and that in the end, 
"three languages are better than two". 
4 Optimizations 
In addition to all the usual optimizations to 
bilingual alignment methods, various things can 
be done to reduce computation times in the 
trilingual alignment method of Section 2: for 
instance, individual bilingual scores from step 
1 can be recorded in memory, to be later re- 
used in step 3. Also, if multiple processors are 
available, the three initial alignments of step 1 
can be done in parallel. By combining these 
optimizations, it is possible to align three texts 
in less than twice the time necessary to align a 
single pair. 
Another possible optimization is to initially 
segment the three texts in parallel, so as to per- 
form step 3 on smaller pieces. Of course, this 
idea is not new, but what makes it particularily 
appealing for trilingual alignment, in addition 
to the usual reduction in the needed time and 
space, is the potential for further improvements 
in the quality of the resulting alignments: In 
the method outlined above, we have chosen to 
base the re-alignment on the initial alignment 
that connected the two most similar versions of 
the text. In reality, nothing proves that this 
similarity is "evenly distributed" on the total- 
ity of the texts. In fact, if we segmented the 
input texts at arbitrary points, we might very 
well discover that the most similar pair of lan- 
guages is not always the same. If this is the case, 
then we could improve our results by doing the 
re-alignment in small chunks, each time basing 
the re-alignment on the pair of languages that 
locally displays the best similarity. 
On the other hand, this approach also carries 
its own risks. Indeed, by pre-segmenting the 
three texts in parallel, we will be fixing points 
in the alignment a priori, namely those points 
at the boundaries between segments. This is 
why it is crucially important to select segmenta- 
tion points judiciously: we will want these to lie 
in areas where all three initial alignments agree 
and each display a high level of confidence. 
In practice, such "points of agreement" be- 
tween the initial bilingual alignments can be 
found by computing their transitive closure, i.e. 
by adding to the union of the three alignments 
all couples whose existence is predicted by tran- 
sitivity (a simple procedure for this can be found 
in Hopcroft and Ullman (1979)). From such 
transitively closed trilingual alignments emerge 
"islands of correspondence", i.e. groups of sen- 
tences that are all related to one another. In 
between these islands lie natural segmentation 
points, that can be viewed as points of agree- 
ment between the three initial alignments. 
We also found that to obtain the best possi- 
ble segmentation f the texts, it was necessary 
7 
to select among such points of agreement only 
those lying between pairs of islands of corre- 
spondence for which we have a high degree of 
confidence. To measure this "confidence", we 
currently use two criteria: first, the number of 
sentences ofeach language in the surrounding is- 
lands; and second, the alignment program's own 
scoring function. The first criterium is based on 
the simple observation that most alignment er- 
rors happen when the translation diverges from 
the usual pattern of "one sentence translates to 
one sentence" (Simard, 1998b); so we only con- 
sider points of agreement lying between "l-to- 
1-to-l" islands. The second criterium is based 
on the observation by Gale and Church (1991) 
that good alignments usually coincide with high 
scoring regions of text. 
To sum up, our optimized trilingual align- 
ment method follows these lines: 
Given three versions of a text A, B and C, 
1. Compute initial bilingual alignments XAB, 
XBC and XAC; 
2. Segment the texts: 
(a) Identify points of agreement between 
XAS, XBC and XAC, by computing 
the transitive closure X~B C of XAB U 
XBC U XAC; 
(b) Among these points, select those 
points that lie between pairs of 1-1-1 
triples within which individual bilin- 
gual alignment scores do not exceed 
some threshold T; 
(c) Segment A, B and C at these points, 
thus producing sub-segments A1...An, 
B1...Bn and C1...C n. 
3. Jointly align each triple of segments 
(Ai, Bi, Ci) as with the trial method (Sec- 
tion 2), and obtain the final trilingual align- 
ment as the union of all partial alignments 
XAB C = UXAiBiCi ; 
This optimization was implemented into the 
trial program, thus producing a program we 
call trial++. The Gospel According to John, in 
French, English and Spanish was then submit- 
ted to this new program. To a certain degree, 
the results of this experiment were a disappoint- 
ment, since they turned out to be virtually iden- 
tical to those obtained with the trial program. 
step trial trial++ 
bilingual alignment 113 113 
pre-segmentation - 12 
re-alignment 69 18 
Total 182 143 
Table 3: Execution times in seconds for indi- 
vidual computation steps of trial and trial++ 
(French, Spanish and English versions of The 
Gospel According to John). 
A closer examination reveals what is going on: 
in 201 out of the 279 segments produced by the 
pre-segmentation procedure, trial++ chose to 
base the re-alignment on the same alignment as 
trial, i.e. the Spanish-French. No differences 
could therefore be expected between the two 
programs on these segments. Of the 78 remain- 
ing segments, 60 contained exactly one sentence 
per language, so not much improvement could 
be expected for those either. In the end, only 18 
segments remained where trial and trial+ + had 
the potential to produce different alignments; 
but even here, both programs produced birtu- 
ally identical results. 
The main difference between trial and 
trial++ was execution times. Table 3 shows 
the times required for each of the computation 
steps of the two programs. What we observe is 
that pre-segmentation reduces execution times 
significantly, without hampering the quality of 
the alignments. We can therefore consider that 
this is a useful step, especially if we are dealing 
with long texts 2. 
5 A D is turb ing  Exper iment . . .  
We mentioned earlier that to compute trilin- 
gual alignments, directly extending dynamic 
programming bilingual alignment methods was 
not a realistic approach from the point of view 
of computational complexity. However, it seems 
that the optimization described in Section 4 for 
pre-segmenting the three texts into small seg- 
ments before performing the trilingual align- 
ment could actually help resolve the problem: 
if we manage to segment he input texts into 
small enough chunks, then a cubic-order algo- 
~Also worth noting here is that pre-segmentation is 
currently carried out by a Perl script. With a proper 
C implementation, execution times for this step would 
probably become negligible. 
8 
Languages 
Spanish 
-French 
French 
-English 
English 
-Spanish 
precision 
recall 
F 
precision 
recall 
F 
precision 
recall 
F 
sfial trial tr ia l - -  
0.997 0.997 0.992 
0.989 0.989 0.984 
0.993:0.993 0.988 
0.956 0.979 0.959 
0.941 0.938 0.919 
0.948 0.958 0.938 
0.952 0.970 0.952 
0.936 0.938 0.914 
0.944 0.954 0.933 
Table 4: Precision, recall and F-measure of s.fial, 
trial and t r ia l - -  
rithm may not be so problematic after all. 
To test this conjecture, we implemented the 
following method into a program called t r ia l - -  
(the origin of the name will become clear in a 
moment ): 
Given three versions of a text A, B and C, 
1. Compute initial bilingual alignments XAB, 
XBe and XAC; 
2. Pre-segment the texts, as in Section 4; 
3. Align each triple of sub-segments 
(Ai, Bi, Ci), using dynamic program- 
ming to find the optimal alignment 
XAiBiCl in the Ai x Bi x Ci space; 
4. Obtain the final trilingual alignment as the 
union of all partial alignments XAB c ---- 
Ui = 1...nXAiBiCi; 
Once again, and as in the trial and trial++ 
methods, we finish up with a final bilingual 
alignment pass to compensate for "transitivity 
noise". 
This new program was succesful in aligning 
The Gospel According to John , using amounts 
of time and memory comparable to the trial++ 
program. However, the resulting alignments 
were quite different, as can be seen in the per- 
formance figures in Table 4. 
The performance of this new program on The 
Gospel According to John turns out to be not 
only poorer than that of the trial program, 
but also poorer than that of the sfial program! 
What is going on, here? After all, we would 
expect t r ia l - -  to be The optimal method, of 
which all others are heuristic approximations. 
Although we have no definitive answer to this 
question, we see two different lines of explana- 
tion. 
The first and most obvious possibility is that 
our initial assumption, namely that three lan- 
guages are better than two, is false. In other 
words: aligning three texts is at least as hard 
as aligning two, and possibly harder. Of course, 
this would also imply that the results obtained 
with the trial and trial++ methods were mere 
accidents. Although this explanation for the 
failure of the t r ia l - -  approach clearly contra- 
dicts our initial intuitions, we cannot entirely 
reject it. We do not, however, pursue this line 
any further. (Besides, it doesn't go any further!) 
The second line of explanation leads us 
straight o the scoring function of our alignment 
methods. As in the trial and trial++ meth- 
ods, the scoring function used in t r ia l - -  is the 
sum of all pairwise (bilingual) alignment scores. 
It could simply be that this way of measuring 
"trilingual fit" is inadequate. 
However, we believe that our problems run 
deeper. To begin with, it could be argued 
that what a trilingual alignment program re- 
ally needs is a true "trilingual translation mod- 
el"; it is not at all clear that three bilingual 
translation models are an adequate substitute 
for this. Even if it were, we know that there 
are numerous problems with the "length" and 
"cognate" stochastic models on which the s fial 
scoring function is based. For instance, we know 
that while these models usually describe the 
phenomena observed in translations adequately, 
they are not necessarily as good when it comes 
to things that are not translations. 
While these weaknesses do not appear to 
cause too many problems when computing bilin- 
gual alignments, it would not be surprising that 
a third language is all it takes for incoherences 
to creep out and performance to degrade. If this 
is indeed the case, then this is one more argu- 
ment in favor of the trial approach: by treating 
multilingual alignments the same way as bilin- 
gual alignments, this approach may let us get 
away with poor translation models, at least un- 
til we come up with something better! 
Conc lus ion  and  Future  Work  
We have showed how an existing bilingual text 
alignment method could be adapted to align 
three versions of a text simultaneously. The 
9 
computational complexity of the resulting trilin- 
gual alignment method is the same as that of 
the underlying bilingual method, and various 
optimizations are possible. In experiments on 
English, French and Spanish versions of The 
Gospel According to John, this approach pro- 
duced sentence alignments ignificantly better 
than those obtained using a bilingual alignment 
program. 
All tests reported here were conducted on a 
single, relatively small corpus of text. The con- 
tradictory results reported in Section 5 highlight 
the need for more work with regard to evalua- 
tion. Such an evaluation exercise would nor- 
mally imply putting together a much larger and 
more varied test corpus, segmented and aligned 
by hand, a process which is known to be costly. 
However, since the goal is to measure improve- 
ments relative to existing bilingual alignment 
methods, an interesting alternative would be to 
perform a relative evaluation instead: the pro- 
grams could then be tested on a much larger 
test-corpus, and the performance of each sys- 
tem would be measured on only those portions 
of text where the alignments differ. The details 
of such an evaluation eed to be worked out. 
Also, it remains to be seen how the trial 
approach would adapt to the general multi- 
lingual case (three languages or more) on the 
one hand, and to the more challenging prob- 
lem of finer-grained alignments on the other 
hand. Here again, we will likely encounter nu- 
merous complications, most notably regarding 
questions of evaluation. Ongoing work in the 
word-alignment track of the ARCADE project 
is likely to bring interesting results regarding 
this question (Langlals et al, 1998). 
Finally, and probably more importantly, 
working with more than two languages has high- 
lighted weaknesses in the modeling of trans- 
lation that underlies our alignment methods. 
Much work remains to be done in this direction. 
Acknowledgements  
Many of the ideas expressed here emerged from 
informal exchanges with Fathi Debili and Pierre 
Isabelle; I am greatly indebted to both for their 
constant support hroughout this project. I also 
wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their 
constructive comments on the paper. 
Re ferences  
1991. Proceedings ofthe 29th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics (A CL), Berkeley, California, June. 
1996. Proceedings of the Second Conference of 
the Association for Machine Translation in 
the Americas (AMTA), Montr@al, Canada. 
Geoffrey J Barton and Michael J E Sternberg. 
1987. A Strategy for the Rapid Multiple 
Alignment of Proteine Sequences. Journal of 
Molecular Biology, 198:327-337. 
Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen A. Della 
Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Fredrick Je- 
linek, John D. Lafferty, Robert L. Mercer, 
and Paul S. Roossin. 1990. A statistical 
approach to machine translation. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 16(2):79-85, June. 
Peter Brown, Jennifer C. Lai, and Robert Mer- 
cer. 1991. Aligning Sentences in Parallel Cor- 
pora. In ACL-29 (ACL, 1991). 
Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vin- 
cent J. Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 
1993. The Mathematics of Machine Transla- 
tion: Parameter Estimation. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(2). 
Humberto Carillo and David Lipman. 1988. 
The Multiple Sequence Alignment Problem 
in Biology. SIAM Journal of Applied Mathe- 
matics, 48(5). 
S.C. Chan, A.K.C. Wong, and D.K.U. Chiu. 
1992. A Survey Of Multiple Sequence Com- 
parison Methods. Bulletin of Mathematical 
Biology, 54(4):563-598. 
Stanley F. Chen. 1993. Aligning Sentences in 
Bilingual Corpora Using Lexical Information. 
In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of 
the Association /or Computational Linguis- 
tics (A CL), Columbus, Ohio, June. 
Ido Dagan and Ken W. Church. 1994. TER- 
MIGHT: Identifying and Translating Tech- 
nical Terminology. In Proceedings off the 
$th Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing (ANLP). 
Toma~ Erjavec and Nancy Ide. 1998. The 
MULTEXT-East Corpus. In LREC-1 (LRE, 
1998). 
William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1991. 
A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilin- 
gual Corpora. In ACL-29 (ACL, 1991). 
John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman. 
1979. Introduction to Automata Theory, Lan- 
10 
guages and Computation. Computer Science. 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 
Nancy Ide and Jean V~ronis. 1994. MULTEXT 
(Multilingual Text Tools and Corpora). 
In Proceedings of the International Confer- 
ence on Computational Linguistics (COL- 
ING) 1994, Kyoto, Japan, August. 
Pierre Isabelle, Marc Dymetman, George Fos- 
ter, Jean-Marc Jutras, Elliott Macklovitch, 
Francois Perrault, Xiaobo Ren, and Michel 
Simard. 1993. Translation Analysis and 
Translation Automation. In Proceedings 
of the 5th Conference on Theoretical and 
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation 
(TMI), Kyoto, Japan. 
Martin Kay and Martin RSscheisen. 1993. 
Text-translation Alignment. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(1). 
Judith Klavans. and Evelyne Tzoukermann. 
1995. Combining Corpus and Machine- 
readable Dictionary Data for Building Bilin- 
gual Lexicons. Machine Translation, 10(3). 
Philippe Langlais and Marc E1-B~ze. 1997. 
Alignement de corpus bilingues : algo- 
rithmes et dvaluation. In Proceedings of 
l~res Journdes Scientifiques et Techniques 
du Rdseau Francophone de l'Ingdnierie de 
la Langue de I'AUPELF-UREF (JST), Avi- 
gnon, April. 
Philippe Langlais, Michel Simard, Jean Vdronis, 
Susan Armstrong, Patrice Bonhomme, Fathi 
Debili, Pierre Isabelle, Emna Souissi, and 
P. Th~ron. 1998. ARCADE: A Cooperative 
Research Project on Parallel Text Alignment 
Evaluation. In LREC-1 (LRE, 1998). 
Lucie Langlois. 1996. Bilingual Concordances: 
A New Tool for Bilingual Lexicographers. In 
AMTA-2 (AMT, 1996). 
1998. Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Language Resources ~ Eval- 
uation (LREC), Granada, Spain. 
Elliott Macklovitch. 1995. TransCheck - -  or 
the Automatic Validation of Human Trans- 
lations. In Proceedings of the Fifth Machine 
Translation Summit, Luxembourg. 
Elliott Macklovitch. 1996. Peut-on vdrifier au- 
tomatiquement la coherence t rminologique? 
META, 41(3). 
A.M. McEnery, A. Wilson, F. S?nchez-Leon, 
and A. Nieto-Serrano. 1997. MultilingualRe- 
sources for European Languages: Contribu- 
tions of the CRATER Project. Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, 12(4). 
I. Dan Melamed. 1996. Automatic Construc- 
tion of Clean Broad-coverage Translation 
Lexicons. In AMTA-2 (AMT, 1996). 
I. Dan Melamed. 1998. Manual Annotation 
of Translational Equivalence: The Blinker 
Project. Technical Report 98-06, IRCS, 
Philadelphia PA. 
Jian-Yun Nie, Pierre Isabelle, Pierre Plam- 
ondon, and George Foster. 1998. Using a 
Probabilistic Translation Model for Cross- 
language Information Retrieval. In Proceed- 
ings of the 6th A CL Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora (WVLC), Montrdal, Canada. 
Michel Simard and Pierre Plamondon. 1998. 
Bilingual Sentence Alignment: Balancing Ro- 
bustness and Accuracy. Machine Translation, 
13(1):59-80. 
Michel Simard, George Foster, and Pierre Is- 
abelle. 1992. Using Cognates to Align Sen- 
tences in Bilingual Corpora. In Proceedings 
of the 4th Conference on Theoretical and 
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation 
(TMI), MontrEal, QuEbec. 
Michel Simard. 1998a. Projet TRIAL : 
Appariement de texte trilingue. URL: 
http ://www-rali. iro. umontreal, ca/Trial. 
Michel Simard. 1998b. RALI-ARCADE : 
Analyse des erreurs d'alignement commises 
par Salign sur les corpus BAF et JOC. 
URL: http ://www-rali. iro.umontreal, ca/- 
at c-a2/analyse-erreur s. 
Michel Simard. 1998c. The BAF: A Corpus 
of English-French Bitext. In LREC-1 (LRE, 
1998). 
M. J. E. Sternberg, editor. 1996. Protein Struc- 
ture Prediction - A Practical Approach. Ox- 
ford University Press, Oxford. 
Robert A. Wagner and Michael J. Fischer. 
1974. The String-to-string Correction Prob- 
lem. Journal of the ACM, 21(1):168-173. 
11 
