Lexical ambiguity and Information Retrieval revisited 
J u l io  Gonza lo  Anse lmo Pe f ias  Fe l i sa  Verde jo  
UNED 
Ciudad Universitaria, s.n. 
28040 Madrid - Spain 
{j u l io ,  anse lmo,  f e l i sa}@ieec ,  uned.  es 
Abst rac t  
A number of previous experiments on the role of 
lexical ambiguity, in Information Retrieval are re- 
produced on the'IR-Semcor test collection (derived 
from Semcor), where both queries and documents 
are hand-tagged ;with phrases, Part-Of-Speech and 
WordNet 1.5 senses. 
Our results indicate that a) Word Sense Disambigua- 
tion can be more beneficial to Information Retrieval 
than the experiments ofSanderson (1994) with arti- 
ficially ambiguous pseudo-words suggested, b) Part- 
Of-Speech tagging does not seem to help Improving 
retrieval, even if it is manually annotated, c) Using 
phrases as indexing terms is not a good strategy if
no partial credit is given to the phrase components. 
1 In t roduct ion  
A major difficulty to experiment with lexical am- 
biguity issues in Information Retrieval is always to 
differentiate he effects of the indexing and retrieval 
strategy being tested from the effects of tagging er- 
rors. Some examples are: 
1. In (RichardSon and Smeaton, 1995), a sophisti- 
cated retrieval system based on conceptual sim- 
ilarity resultled in a decrease of IR performance. 
It was not possible, however, to distinguish the 
effects of the strategy and the effects of auto- 
matic Wordl Sense Disambiguation (WSD) er- 
rors. In (Smeaton and Quigley, 1996), a simi- 
lar strategy and a combination of manual dis- 
ambiguation and very short documents -image 
captions- pioduced, however, an improvement 
of IR perforinance. 
2. In (Krovetz, 1997), discriminating word senses 
with differefit Part-Of-Speech (as annotated by 
the Church :POS tagger) also harmed retrieval 
efficiency. Krovetz noted than more than half 
of the words in a dictionary that differ in POS 
are related i n meaning, but he could not decide 
whether the decrease of performance was due 
to the loss of such semantic relatedness or to 
automatic POS tagging errors. 
3. In (Sanderson, 1994), the problem of dis- 
cerning the effects of differentiating word 
senses from the effects of inaccurate dis- 
ambiguation was overcome using artificially 
created pseudo-words (substituting, for in- 
stance, all occurrences of banana or kalashnikov 
for banana/kalashnikov) that could be disam- 
biguated with 100% accuracy (substituting ba- 
nana/kalashnikov back to the original term in 
each occurrence, ither banana or kalashnikov). 
He found that IR processes were quite resistant 
to increasing degrees of lexical ambiguity, and 
that disambiguation harmed IR efficiency if per- 
formed with less that 90% accuracy. The ques- 
tion is whether real ambiguous words would be- 
have as pseudo-words. 
4. In (Schiitze and Pedersen, 1995) it was shown 
that sense discriminations extracted from the 
test collections may enhance text retrieval. 
However, the static sense inventories in dictio- 
naries or thesauri -such as WordNet- have not 
been used satisfactorily in IR. For instance, in 
(Voorhees, 1994), manual expansion of TREC 
queries with semantically related words from 
WordNet only produced slight improvements 
with the shortest queries. 
In order to deal with these problems, we designed 
an IR test collection which is hand annotated with 
Part-Of-Speech and semantic tags from WordNet 
1.5. This collection was first introduced in (Gonzalo 
et al, 1998) and it is described in Section 2. This 
collection is quite small for current IR standards (it 
is only slightly bigger than the TIME collection), 
but offers a unique chance to analyze the behavior 
of semantic approaches to IR before scaling them up 
to TREC-size collections (where manual tagging is 
unfeasible). 
In (Gonzalo et al, 1998), we used the manual 
annotations in the IR-Semcor collection to show 
that indexing with WordNet synsets can give sig- 
nificant improvements o Text Retrieval, even for 
large queries. Such strategy works better than the 
synonymy expansion in (Voorhees, 1994), probably 
because it identifies ynonym terms but, at the same 
195 
time, it differentiates word  senses. 
In this paper we use a variant of the IR -Semcor  
collection to revise the results of the experiments by 
Sanderson (Sanderson, 1994) and Krovetz (Krovetz, 
1997) cited above. The  first one is reproduced using 
both ambiguous  pseudo-words and real ambiguous  
words, and the qualitative results compared.  This 
permits us to know if our results are compatible with 
Sanderson experiments or not. The  effect of lexical 
ambiguity on IR  processes is discussed in Section 3, 
and the sensitivity of recall/precision to Word  Sense 
Disambiguat ion errors in Section 4. Then,  the exper- 
iment by Krovetz is reproduced with automatic and 
manual ly  produced POS annotations in Section 5, in 
order to discern the effect of annotating POS f rom 
the effect of erroneous annotations. Finally, the rich- 
ness of mult iwords in WordNet  1.5 and of phrase an- 
notations in the IR -Semcor  collection are exploited 
in Section 6 to test whether  phrases are good index- 
ing terms or not. 
2 The  IR -SEMCOR tes t  co l lec t ion  
The  best -known publicly available corpus hand- 
tagged with WordNet  senses is SEMCOR (Miller et 
al., 1993), a subset of the Brown Corpus  of about 
100 documents  that occupies about 2.4 Mb.  of text 
(22Mb.  including annotations). The  collection is 
rather heterogeneous, covering politics, sports, mu-  
sic, cinema, philosophy, excerpts f rom fiction novels, 
scientific texts... 
We adapted SEMCOR in order to build a test col- 
lection -that we call IR-SEMCOR- in four manual 
steps: 
? We have split the documents in Semcor 1.5 to 
get coherent chunks of text for retrieval. We 
have obtained 171 fragments with an average 
length of 1331 words per fragment. The new 
documents in Semcor 1.6 have been added with- 
out modification (apart from mapping Wordnet 
1.6 to WordNet 1.5 senses), up to a total of 254 
documents. 
? We have extended the original TOPIC tags of 
the Brown Corpus with a hierarchy of sub-tags, 
assigning a set of tags to each text in our col- 
lection. This is not used in the experiments 
reported here. 
? We have written a summary for each of the first 
171 fragments, with lengths varying between 4 
and 50 words and an average of 22 words per 
summary. Each summary is a human expla- 
nation of the text contents, not a mere bag of 
related keywords. 
? Finally, we have hand-tagged each of the sum- 
maries with WordNet 1.5 senses. When a word 
or term was not present in the database, it was 
left unchanged. In general, such terms corre- 
spond to proper nouns; in particular, groups 
(vg. Fulton_County_Grand_Jury), persons (Cer- 
vantes) or locations (Fulton). 
We also generated a list of "stop-senses" and a list 
of "stop-synsets", automatically translating a stan- 
dard list of stop words for English. 
In our first experiments (Gonzalo et al, 1998; 
Gonzalo et al, 1999), the summaries were used as 
queries, and every query was expected to retrieve 
exactly one document (the one summarized by the 
query). In order to have a more standard set of 
relevance judgments, we have used the following as- 
sumption here: if an original Semcor document was 
split into n chunks in our test collection, the sum- 
mary of each of the chunks should retrieve all the 
chunks of the original document. This gave us 82 
queries with an average of 6.8 relevant documents 
per query. In order to test the plausibility of this ar- 
tificial set of relevance judgments, we produced an 
alternative set of random relevance judgments. This 
is used as a baseline and included for comparison in 
all the results presented in this paper. 
The retrieval engine used in the experiments re- 
ported here is the INQUERY system (Callan et al, 
1992). 
3 Lexical Ambiguity and IR 
Sanderson used a technique previously introduced 
in (Yarowski, 1993) to evaluate Word Sense Disam- 
biguators. Given a text collection, a (size 2) pseudo- 
word collection is obtained by substituting all oc- 
currences of two randomly chosen words (say, bank 
and spring) by a new ambiguous word (bank/spring). 
Disambiguating each occurrence of this pseudo-word 
consists on finding whether the original term was ei- 
ther bank or spring. Note that we are not strictly 
discriminating senses, but also conflating synonym 
senses of different words. We previously showed 
(Gonzalo et al, 1998) that WordNet synsets seem 
better indexing terms than senses. 
Sanderson used an adapted version of the Reuters 
text categorization collection for his experiment, and 
produced versions with pseudo-words of size 2 to 10 
words per pseudo-word. Then he evaluated the de- 
crease of IR performance as the ambiguity of the 
indexing terms is increased. He found that the re- 
sults were quite insensitive to ambiguity, except for 
the shortest queries. 
We have reproduce Sanderson's experiment for 
pseudo-words ranging from size 1 (unmodified) to 
size 5. But when the pseudo-word bank/spring is dis- 
ambiguated as spring, this term remains ambiguous: 
it can be used as springtime, or hook, or to jump, etc. 
We have, therefore, produced another collection of 
"ambiguity 0", substituting each word by its Word- 
Net 1.5 semantic tag. For instance, spring could be 
196 
P~ 
E 
?5 
40 
35 
30 
:25 
20  
'15 
10 
0 
0 
Figure 1 : Effects of ambiguity 
i i ! i 
all (82) queries -e--* 
:'-.. 24 shortest quedes -+--- 
...~.-..~--. 22 longest quedes -o-- 
~ : .  Random baseline .......... ""-':.-... 
...... bas~!).ne .................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 
synsets wolrds Size 2 ps~udowords Sizle 3 Sizle 4 Size 
1 2 3 4 
substituted for n07062238, which is a unique identi- 
fier for the synset {spring, springtime: the season o/ 
growth}. 
The results of the experiment can be seen in Fig- 
ure 1. We provide 10-point average precision mea- 
sures 1 for ambiguity 0 (synsets), 1 (words), and 2 
to 5 (pseudo-words of size 2,3,4,5). Three curves 
are plotted: all queries, shortest queries, and longer 
queries. It can be: seen that: 
? The decrease of IR performance from synset in- 
dexing to word indexing (the slope of the left- 
most part of: the figure) is more accused than 
the effects of adding pseudoword ambiguity (the 
rest of the figure). Thus, reducing real ambi- 
guity seems more useful than reducing pseudo- 
word ambiguity. 
? The curve for shorter queries have a higher 
slope, confirming that resolving ambiguity is 
more benefitial when the relative contribution 
of each query term is higher. This is true both 
for real ambiguity and pseudo-word ambiguity. 
Note, however , that the role of real ambiguity is 
more important for longer queries than pseudo- 
word ambiguity: the curve for longer queries 
has a high slope from synsets to words, but it is 
very smooth from size 1 to size 5 pseudo-words. 
? In our experiments, horter queries behave bet- 
ter than longer queries for synset indexing (the 
leftmost points of the curves). This unexpected 
1The 10-point average precision is a standard IR measure 
obtained by averaging precision at recall points 10, 20,... 1O0. 
behavior is idiosyncratic of the collection: our 
documents are fragments from original Semcor 
texts, and we hypothesize that fragments of one 
text are relevant o each other. The shorter 
summaries are correlated with text chunks that 
have more cohesion (for instance, a Semcor 
text is split into several IRSemcor documents 
that comment on different baseball matches). 
Longer summaries behave the other way round: 
IRSemcor documents correspond to less cohe- 
sive text chunks. As introducing ambiguity is 
more harming for shorter queries, this effect is 
quickly shadowed by the effects of ambiguity. 
4 WSD and IR  
The second experiment carried out by Sanderson 
was to disambiguate the size 5 collection introduc- 
ing fixed error rates (thus, the original pseudo-word 
collection would correspond to 100% correct disam- 
biguation). In his collection, disambiguating below 
90% accuracy produced worse results than not dis- 
ambiguating at all. He concluded that WSD needs 
to be extremely accurate to improve retrieval results 
rather than decreasing them. 
We have reproduce his experiment with our size 
5 pseudo-words collection, ranging from 0% to 50% 
error rates (100% to 50% accuracy). In this case, 
we have done a parallel experiment performing real 
Word Sense Disambiguation on the original text col- 
lection, introducing the fixed error rates with respect 
to the manual semantic tags. The error rate is un- 
derstood as the percentage of polysemous words in- 
197 
"3 
"B 
~2 
C 
0 
50 
45 
40 
35, 
30  
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
0 
Figure 2: Effects of WSD errors. Real words versus pseudo words 
i I i i I t i l 
Synset indexing with WSD errors -e--- 
Text (no disambiguation thresold for real words) ..... 
Size 5 pseudowords with WSD errors -+-- 
Size 5 pseudowords (no desambiguation thresold for size 5 pseudowords) ........... 
Random retdeval (baseline) ..... 
. t~xL-  ....... . g:.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  __._____~_ . . 
. . . . . .  + . . . . . . . . . .  -4-  . . . . . . . . . . .  - I~ . .  
size 5 pseudowords '-,+.. .+... 
" ' . .po? - "  
_as_eJ!o~ .............................................................................................................. 
I I I I I I I I I 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
Percentage of WSD errors 
correctly disambiguated. 
The results of both experiments can be seen in 
Figure 2. We have plotted 10-point average preci- 
sion in the Y-axis against increasing percentage of 
errors in the X-axis. The curve representing real 
WSD has as a threshold the 10-pt average precision 
for plain text, and the curve representing pseudo- 
disambiguation on the size-5 pseudo-word collection 
has as threshold the results for the size-5 collection 
without disambiguation. From the figure it can be 
seen that: 
? In the experiment with size 5 pseudo-word is- 
ambiguation, our collections eems to be more 
resistant to WSD errors than the Reuters collec- 
tion. The 90% accuracy threshold is now 75%. 
? The experiment with real disambiguation is 
more tolerant o WSD errors. Above 60% accu- 
racy (40% error rate) it is possible to improve 
the results of retrieval with plain text. 
The discrepancy between the behavior of pseudo- 
words and real ambiguous terms may reside in the 
nature of real polysemy: 
? Unlike the components of a pseudo-word, the 
different meanings of a real, polysemous word 
are often related. In (Buitelaar, 1998) it is 
estimated that only 5% of the word stems in 
WordNet can be viewed as true homonyms (un- 
related senses), while the remaining 95% poly- 
semy can be seen as predictable xtensions of 
a core sense (regular polysemy). Therefore, a 
disambiguation error might be less harmful if a 
strongly related term is chosen. This fact Mso 
suggests that Information Retrieval does not 
necessarily demand full disambiguation. Rather 
than picking one sense and discarding the rest, 
WSD in IR should probably weight senses ac- 
cording to their plausibility, discarding only the 
less likely ones. This is used in (Schiitze and 
Pedersen, 1995) to get a 14% improvement of 
the retrieval performance disambiguating with 
a co-occurrence-based in uced thesaurus. This 
is an issue that arises naturally when translat- 
ing queries for Cross-Language Text Retrieval, 
in contrast to Machine Translation. A Ma- 
chine Translation system has to choose one sin- 
gle translation for every term in the source 
document. However, a translation of a query 
in Cross-Language r trieval has to pick up all 
likely translations for each word in the query. 
In (Gonzalo et al, 1999) we argue that mapping 
a word into word senses (or WordNet synsets) 
is strongly related to that problem. 
Although the average polysemy of the terms 
in the Semcor collection is around five (as in 
Sanderson's experiment), the average polysemy 
of WordNet 1.5 terms is between 2 and 3. The 
reason is that polysemy is correlated with fre- 
quency of usage. That means that the best dis- 
criminators for aquery  will be (in general) the 
less polysemous terms. The more polysemous 
terms are more frequent and thus worse dis- 
criminators, and disambiguation errors are not 
198 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
Figure 3: Effects of manual and automatic POS tagging 
i t ~ i i J i i 
No tags 
Brill POS tagging -4--. 
Manual POS tags -D-- 
' Random baseline ..x ..... 
I I I I I I I I 
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
recall 
as harmful as for the pseudo-words experiment. 
5 POS tagg ing  and IR  
Among many other issues, Krovetz tested to what 
extent Part-Of-Speech information was a good 
source of evidence for sense discrimination. He 
annotated words in the T IME collection with the 
Church Part-Of-Speech tagger, and found that per- 
formance decreased. Krovetz was unable to deter- 
mine whether the results were due to the tagging 
strategy or to the errors made by the tagger. He 
observed that, in many cases, words were related in 
meaning despite a difference in Part-Of-Speech (for 
instance, in "summer shoes design" versus "they de- 
sign sandals"). But he also found that not all errors 
made by the tagger cause a decrease in retrieval per- 
formance. 
We have reproduced the experiment by Krovetz 
in our test collection, using the Brill POS tagger, 
on one hand, and the manual POS annotations, on 
the other. The precision/recall curves are plotted in 
Figure 3 against plain text retrieval. That curves 
does not show any significant difference between the 
three approaches. A more detailed examination of 
some representative queries is more informative: 
5.1 Manua l  POS tagg ing  vs. p la in  text  
Annotating Part-Of-Speech misses relevant informa- 
tion for some queries. For instance, a query con- 
taining "talented baseball playe~' can be matched 
against a relevant document containing "is one of 
the top talents of the time", because stemming con- 
flates talented and talent. However, POS tagging 
gives ADg/talent versus N/talent, which do not 
match. Another example is "skilled diplomat of an 
Asian Countrff' versus "diplomatic policy", where 
N/diplomat and ADJ/diplomat are not matched. 
However, the documents where the matching 
terms agree in category are ranked much higher with 
POS tagging, because there are less competing doc- 
uments. The two effects seem to compensate, pro- 
ducing a similar recall/precision curve on overall. 
Therefore, annotating Part-Of-Speech does not 
seem worthy as a standalone indexing strategy, even 
if tagging is performed manually. Perhaps giving 
partial credit to word occurrences with different 
POS would be an interesting alternative. 
Annotating POS, however, can be a useful inter- 
mediate task for IR. It is, for instance, a first step 
towards semantic annotation, which produced much 
better results in our experiments. 
5.2 Brill vs. manual tagging 
Although the Brill tagger makes more mistakes than 
the manual annotations (which are not error free 
anyway), the mistakes are not completely corre- 
lated to retrieval decrease. For instance, a query 
about "summer shoe design" is manually annotated 
as "summer/N shoe/N design/N", while the Brill 
tagger produces "summer/N shoe/N design/if'. But 
an appropriate document contains "Italian designed 
sandals", which is manually annotated as "Ital- 
ian/ADJ designed/ADg sandals/N" (no match), but 
as "Italian/ADJ designed/V sandals/IV" by the Brill 
tagger (matches design and designed after stem- 
ming). 
199 
In general, comparing with no tagging, the au- 
tomatic and the manual tagging behave in a very 
similar way. 
6 Phrase  index ing  
WordNet is rich in multiword entries (more than 
55000 variants in WordNet 1.5). Therefore, such 
collocations are annotated as single entries in the 
Semcor and IR-Semcor collections. The manual an- 
notation also includes name expressions for persons, 
groups, locations, institutions, etc., such as Drew 
Centennial Church or Mayor-nominate Ivan Allen 
Yr.. In (Krovetz, 1997), it is shown that the detec- 
tion of phrases can be useful for retrieval, although 
it is crucial to assign partial credit also to the com- 
ponents of the collocation. 
We have performed an experiment o compare 
three different indexing strategies: 
1. Use plain text both for documents and queries, 
without using phrase information. 
2. Use manually annotated phrases as single in- 
dexing units in documents and queries. This 
means that New_York is a term unrelated to 
new or York (which seems clearly beneficial 
both for weighting and retrieval), but also that 
Drew_Centennial_Church would be a single in- 
dexing term unrelated to church, which can lead 
to precise matchings, but also to lose correct 
query/document correlations. 
3. Use plain text for documents, but exploit 
the INQUERY #phrase query operator for 
the collocations in the query. For instance, 
meeting of the National_Football_League is ex- 
pressed as #sum(meeting #phrase(Nat iona l  
Footba l l  League)) in the query language. 
The #phrase operator assigns credit to the par- 
tial components of the phrase, while priming its 
co-occurrence. 
The results of the experiments can be seen in Fig- 
ure 4. Overall, indexing with multiwords behaves 
slightly worse than standard word indexing. Using 
the INQUERY #phrase operator behaves imilarly 
to word indexing. 
A closer look at some case studies, however, gives 
more information: 
? In some cases, simply indexing with phrases is 
obviously the wrong choice. For instance, a 
query containing "candidate in governor's_race" 
does not match "opened his race for governor'. 
This supports the idea that it is crucial to assign 
credit to the partial components of a phrase, 
and also. that it may be useful to look for co- 
occurrence beyond one word windows. 
? Phrase indexing works much better when the 
query is longer and there are relevant terms 
apart from one or more multiwords. In such 
cases, a relevant document containing just one 
query term is ranked much higher with phrase 
indexing, because false partial matches with 
a phrase are not considered. Just using the 
#phrase operator behaves mostly like no phrase 
indexing for these queries, because this filtering 
is not achieved. 
Phrase indexing seems more adequate when the 
query is intended to be precise, which is not the 
case of our collection (we assume that the sum- 
mary of a fragment has all the fragments in the 
original text as relevant documents). For in- 
stance, "story of a famous strip cartoonist" is 
not related -with phrase indexing- to a docu- 
ment containing "detective_story". This is cor- 
rect if the query is intended to be strict, al- 
though in our collection these are fragments of 
the same text and thus we are assuming they 
are related. The same happens with the query 
"The board_of_regents of Paris_Junior_College 
has named the school's new president", which 
is not related to "Junior or Senior High School 
Teaching Certificate". This could be the right 
decision in a different relevance judgment setup, 
but it is wrong for our test collection. 
7 Conclus ions 
We have revised a number of previous experiments 
regarding lexical ambiguity and Information Re- 
trieval, taking advantage of the manual annotations 
in our IR-Semcor collection. Within the limitations 
of our collection (mainly its reduced size), we can 
extract some conclusions: 
? Sense ambiguity could be more relevant o In- 
formation Retrieval than suggested by Sander- 
son's experiments with pseudo-words. In par- 
ticular, his estimation that 90% accuracy is 
needed to benefit from Word Sense Disambigua- 
tion techniques does not hold for real ambiguous 
words in our collection. 
? Part-Of-Speech information, even if manually 
annotated, seems too discriminatory for Infor- 
mation Retrieval purposes. This clarifies the 
results obtained by Krovetz with an automatic 
POS tagger. 
? Taking phrases as indexing terms may decrease 
retrieval efficiency. Phrase indexing could be 
more useful, anyway, when the queries demands 
a very precise kind of documents, and when the 
number of available documents is high. 
In our opinion, lexical ambiguity will become a 
central topic for Information Retrieval as the impor- 
tance of Cross-Language Retrieval grows (something 
200 
"5 
100 
I 
9O 
8O 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
Figure 4: Effects of phrase indexing 
I , i I I I i , 
No phrase indexing --e-- 
k Phrase indexing -~-  
' ,~ #phrase operator in queries -G-- 
' , ~  Random baseline ..x ..... 
?, 
l I I I I I I I 
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 1 O0 
recall 
that the increasing multilinguality of Internet is al- 
ready producing). Although the problem of Word 
Sense Disambigu~ation s still far from being solved, 
we believe that specific disambiguation for (Cross- 
Language) Information Retrieval could achieve good 
results by weight!ng candidate senses without a spe- 
cial commitment to Part-Of-Speech differentiation. 
An interesting point is that the WordNet struc- 
ture is not well suited for IR in this respect, as it 
keeps noun, verb and adjective synsets completely 
unrelated. The EuroWordNet multilingual database 
(Vossen, 1998), on the other hand, features cross- 
part-of-speech semantic relations that could be use- 
ful in an IR setting. 
Acknowledgments 
Thanks to Douglas Oard for the suggestion that orig- 
inated this work. 
References 
P. Buitelaar. 1998. CoreLex: systematic poly- 
semy and underspeci\]ication. Ph.D. thesis, De- 
partment of Computer Science, Brandeis Univer- 
sity, Boston. 
J. Callan, B. Croft, and S. Harding. 1992. The IN- 
QUERY retrieval system. In Proceedings of the 
3rd Int. Conference on Database and Expert Sys- 
tems applications. 
J. Gonzalo, M. F. Verdejo, I. Chugur, and 
J. Cigarrgm. 1.998. Indexing with Wordnet 
synsets can improve Text Retrieval. In Proceed- 
ings of the COLING/ACL Workshop on Usage 
of WordNet in Natural Language Processing Sys- 
tems. 
J. Gonzalo, F. Verdejo, and I. Chugur. 1999. Us- 
ing EuroWordNet in a concept-based approach to 
Cross-Language T xt Retrieval. Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, Special Issue on Multilinguality in the 
Software Industry: the AI contribution. 
R. Krovetz. 1997. Homonymy and polysemy 
in Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of 
ACL/EACL '97. 
G. A. Miller, C. Leacock, R. Tengi, and R. T. 
Bunker. 1993. A semantic oncordance. In Pro- 
ceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Lan- 
guage Technology. Morgan Kauffman. 
R. Richardson and A.F. Smeaton. 1995. Using 
Wordnet in a knowledge-based approach to In- 
formation Retrieval. In Proceedings of the BCS- 
IRSG Colloquium, Crewe. 
M. Sanderson. 1994. Word Sense Disambiguation 
and Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of 17th 
International Conference on Research and Devel- 
opment in Information Retrieval. 
H. Schiitze and J. Pedersen. 1995. Information Re- 
trieval based on word senses. In Fourth Annual 
Symposium on Document Analysis and Informa- 
tion Retrieval. 
A.F. Smeaton and A. Quigley. 1996. Experiments 
on using semantic distances between words in im- 
age caption retrieval. In Proceedings of the 19 th 
International Conference on Research and Devel- 
opment in Information Retrieval. 
Ellen M. Voorhees. 1994. Query expansion using 
201 
lexical-semantic relations. In Proceedings of the 
17th International Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval. 
Vossen, P. (ed). 1998. Euro WordNet: a multilingual 
database with lexical semantic networks. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
D. Yarowski. 1993. One sense per collocation. In 
Proceedings of ARPA Human Language Technol- 
ogy Workshop. 
202 
