A recognition-based meta-scheme for dialogue acts annotation 
Claudia Soria, Vito Pirrelli 
CNR - Ist i tuto di Linguistica Computazionale 
Via della Faggiola 32, 1-56126 Pisa, I taly 
{soria, vito}@ilc, pi. cnr. ii; 
Abst rac t  
The paper describes a new formal framework for 
comparison, design and standardization of annota- 
tion schemes for dialogue acts. The framework takes 
a recognition-based approach to dialogue tagging 
and defines four independent taxonomies of tags, 
one for each orthogonal dimension of linguistic and 
contextual analysis assumed to have a bearing on 
identification of illocutionary acts. The advantages 
and limitations of this proposal over other previous 
attempts are discussed and concretely exemplified. 
1 Introduct ion 
Recent years have witnessed a growing concern with 
the provision of standardized formats for exchange, 
integration and use of shareable annotated dialogues, 
and the resulting development of formal frameworks 
intended to compare, standardize and customize an- 
notation schemes for dialogue acts (see (Allen and 
Core, 1997; Core and Allen, 1997; Larseon, 1998; 
Ichikawa et al, 1998). Arguably, these fforts hould 
be instrumental in speeding up progress in the field, 
meeting at the same time the rapidly increasing de- 
mands of dialogue system technology. 
It is important to observe that any framework of 
this kind should be able to e~plieitly characterize 
both scope and nature of the dialogue phenomena 
covered by a given tag set, since they appear to vary 
considerably from scheme to scheme, as a function of 
i) the analytical standpoints adopted and ii) the di- 
mensions of linguistic and contextual nalysis taken 
into account. We hereafter introduce some key-ideas 
(namely, recognition-based vs generation-based an- 
notation and annotation meta-scheme) that have, 
in our view of things, the potential of making ex- 
plicit in a principled and declarative way the rela- 
tionship between tag definitions and underlying di- 
mensions of analysis. Careful consideration of this 
relationship makes it possible to conceive of a di- 
alogue tag as a point in an n--dimensionai space, 
rather than as an undecomposable conceptual unit. 
As we will see, this offers a number of advantages 
over other existing approaches to scheme compari- 
75 
son and standardization. 1 
I.I Recognition-based annotation 
It is useful to recognize two complementary ap- 
proaches to labeling utterances with dialogue acts, 
hereafter referred to for convenience as a generation- 
based and a recognition-based perspective. The gen- 
eration perspective is chiefly concerned with the 
question "given a dialogue utterance, what underly- 
ing mental process might have produced it?". Such a 
mental process can be defined i) as a communicative 
"intention", or, alternatively, ii) in terms of a for- 
real characterization of the reasoning process under- 
lying dialogues, with specific emphasis on the effects 
of speech acts on the agents' mental states (or in- 
formation states) and, ultimately, on dialogue plan- 
ning (Poesio and Traum, 1998; Poesio et al, 1999). 
The recognition perspective, on the other hand, ad- 
dresses the question: "given a dialogue utterance, 
on the basis of what available linguistic or contextual 
clues can one recognize its underlying intention(s)?". 
By linguistic and contextual clues, we mean here a 
variety of more or less overtly available information, 
ranging from the surface linguistic realization of an 
utterance, to its propositional content and the prag- 
matic context where the dialogue is situated. 
A generation-based approach lays emphasis 
on the (assumed) accessibility of the mental 
states/intentions of a speaker in a dialogue, either 
through an explicit representation f these states (as 
feature-based informational structures), or through 
a step of abductive inference on the annotator's 
part. In the recognition-based approach, attention 
is shifted to the interpretability of an utterance as 
conveying a certain intention, where interpretabil- 
ity is a function of the information available to the 
hearer/annotator at a certain point in time. Ideally, 
the two perspectives should lead to the same anno- 
tated dialogue. In practice, this is often not the case, 
due to the wide range of variation in the information 
accessible to the hearer/annotator. 
IThis work is carried out in the framework of the MATE 
project. In particular, we would like to acknowledge our debt 
to (Klein et al, 1998). 
In a generation-based approach, an utterance can 
simultaneously be intended to respond, promise, re- 
quest, inform etc. A recognition-based perspective 
makes use of a different notion of multifunctionality 
whereby several intentions can be recognized on the 
basis of distinct dimensions of linguistic and extra- 
linguistic information. For example, an utterance 
like I want to go to Bo-~ton can be i) a claim, if 
judged on its linguistic declarative form only, ii) an 
answer, relative to a previously uttered request, and 
iii) an order, if- say - addressed to a taxi--driver, In 
this perspective, it is relatively immaterial whether, 
e.g., the utterance was ultimately and primarily in- 
tended as an assert; rather, it is sufficient o observe 
that one could interpret I want to  go to  Boston 
as an assert, on the basis of a certain type of avail- 
able linguistic or contextual information. 
It is important o emphasize at this stage that 
virtually no existing annotation scheme for dialogue 
acts can be said to instantiate ither perspective only. 
In fact, the vast majority of tag sets exhibit, to dif- 
ferent degrees, a combination of the two approaches. 
In the remainder of this paper, we will elaborate the 
recognition-based perspective as a basis for annota- 
tion scheme comparability, standardization a d cus- 
tomization. 
1.2 The notion of meta--scheme 
We call an annotation recta-scheme a formal frame- 
work for comparing annotation schemes, which can 
also be used as a practical blue--print to scheme de- 
sign and customization. A crucial feature of the 
annotation recta-scheme illustrated here is that it 
is intended to make explicit the type of linguistic 
and contextual information relied upon in the pro- 
cess of tagging dialogue utterances with illocution- 
ary acts. In this respect, the meta-scheme is chiefly 
recognition-based. 
In practice, this is achieved by defining one in- 
dependent taxonomy of utterance tags for each of 
the orthogonal dimensions of linguistic or contex- 
tual analysis which have a bearing on the definition 
of dialogue acts. For example, in some cases dia- 
logue acts are identified on the basis of the linguistic 
form of an utterance only. We thus find it conve- 
nient to define an autonomous typology of tags based 
on purely grammatical facts such as, e.g., subject- 
auxiliary inversion, wh-words, a rise of intonation 
etc. Surely, tags defined along this dimension will 
often fail to convey the primary intention of a given 
utterance: for example, an interrogative sentence 
may conceal an order, and an explicit performative 
may turn an assert into a request. Yet this should 
not worry us, as long as the relation between a tag 
and its supporting dimension of analysis is explicitly 
stated. 
It should be appreciated that, in existing annota- 
tion schemes, the relationship between linguistic and 
contextual c ues on the one hand and tag definitions 
on the other hand is characterized only implicitly. 
Linguistic and contextual dimensions of analysis are 
simultaneously drawn upon in tag definitions in a 
complex way, so that the relationship of these di- 
mensions with each tag is often only indirect. This 
will be illustrated in more detail in the following 
sections. Suffice it to point out here that, far from 
being a methodological flaw, this practice responds 
to the practical need of annotating utterances in a 
maximally economic way, i.e. with the sparsest pos- 
sible set of tags. Clearly, requirements of economy 
and ease of annotation are appropriate for labeling 
a dialogue text with a specific application or a spe- 
cific theoretical framework in mind. However, they 
may get in the way when it comes to comparing dif- 
ferent annotation schemes, or exporting the anno- 
tation scheme developed for a given application to 
another domain. In these latter cases, perspicuity of 
the linguistic and contextual content of tags should 
be given priority over other more practical concerns. 
2 .P rev ious  s tandard izat ion  ef fo r ts  
In this section we will sketchily overview two of the 
most important attempts at providing standardized 
dialogue-act tags for general annotation, namely 
DAMSL (Allen and Core, 1997; Core and Allen, 1997) 
and Larsson's (Larsson, 1998), with particular em- 
phasis on the assumptions underlying their method- 
ological approach. 
DAMSL is certainly the most influential effort in 
the provision of standards for dialogue annotation 
to date (Allen and Core, 1997; Core and Allen, 
1997). It is designed to offer a general, underspeci- 
fled scheme, potentially usable in different domains, 
and susceptible of further specification into finer 
grained domain-specific categories. DAMSL is cred- 
ited for taking the issue of utterance multifunction- 
ality most seriously: an utterance can be tagged at 
the same time along several orthogonal dimensions 
of annotation, each of them defining an independent 
layer of communicative intention. Accordingly, the 
same utterance can be interpreted, e.g., as giving in- 
formation, making a request, making a promise tc. 
It is important o emphasize here that, in DAMSL, 
multiple dimensions erve the purpose of capturing 
different facets of an illocutionary act and are not in- 
tended to directly reflect he different linguistic and 
contextual dimensions on the basis of which these 
facets are recognized. In this sense, DAMSL multi- 
dimensionality is predominantly generation-based. 
Nonetheless, tag definitions are a mixed bag of gen- 
eration and recognition-based criteria. 
At the core of the DAMSL taxonomy lies a biparti- 
tion between the so-called forward- and backward- 
looking dialogue functions, a fairly faithful render- 
ing of Searlian speech act categories (Searle, 1969). 
76  
The assumed orthogonality of all dimensions makes 
virtually any combination of DAMSL dimensions ad- 
missible for annotation, in a potentially combina- 
torial explosion of multiple tags. Finally, although 
originally conceived as a recta-scheme, DAMSL has 
been used and circulated since its conception as yet 
another independent scheme in its own right, often 
proving too general to be of practical use. More 
importantly, the fact that it provides non-exclusive 
categories seems to have a negative impact on its 
reliability (Core and Allen, 1997). 
A different approach to standardization is taken in 
Larsson (Larsson, 1998), who suggests to model the 
comparison of two different encoding schemes as a 
mapping function between the two corresponding hi- 
erarchies of tags (taxonomies). The correspondence 
induced by the mapping function can be one-to-one, 
one-to-many and one-to-none. Two tags which are 
in a one-to-one relationship are taken to be synony- 
mous. A one-to-many relationship is interpreted 
as suggesting that one tag in a taxonomy subsumes 
more than one tag in another taxonomy, as illus- 
trated in figure 1 for the relationship between Info- 
request in DAMSL and the tags Check, Align, Query- 
yn and Query-w in the HCRC MAP TASK annota- 
tion scheme (Carietta et al, 1996). One-to-many 
mappings (and many-to-one) hold between those 
branches in two taxonomies which are specified at 
different levels of granularity. Finally, a one-to-none 
correspondence signifies that a particular taxonomy 
is silent on a range of phenomena which happen to be 
overtly marked in another taxonomy. For instance, 
since MAP TASK provides no tag for the category 
of commissives, this phenomenon is understood to 
be covered by tags provided in DAMSL only. Even- 
tually, a more general and comprehensive hierarchy 
subsuming the two compared schemes i  built by a) 
taking the intersection set of synonymous tags, b) 
taking one-to-none tags from either taxonomy only, 
c) representing a one-to-many tag relationship as 
a mother-daughters hierarchy of the corresponding 
nodes. For reasons that will be made clear in the fol- 
lowing section, this approach ends up considerably 
re-definin9 scope and applicability of the tags con- 
sidereal. For example, when a Reply-y of MAP TASK 
is classified as a daughter node of DAMSL Answer, 
one is in fact ignoring that, in MAP TASK, Reply-y 
has a rather broader scope than the one entailed by 
this correspondence. 
To sum up, the standardization efforts reviewed 
in this section are not concerned with drawing a 
principled line between a generation-based and a 
recognition-based perspective. As a result, tags of 
different schemes are typically related to one an- 
other through functional synonymy, subsumption or 
generation-based multifunctionality. As we will see 
in the following section, this may in some cases ob- 
DAMSL MAPTASK 
assert ~ x p l a i n  
"~ry - . t '~  
query-w 
Figure 1: Many-to--one/one-to-many mapping 
scure the precise nature of these relations. 
3 Scheme Compar i son  
As already pointed out above, Larsson's approach 
to developing more comprehensive tag hierarchies 
by mapping comparable tag sets logically presup- 
poses three types of correspondence b ing at work: 
one-to-one, one-to-many and one-to-none. This is 
pictorially illustrated in figure 1, which summarizes 
Larseon's (Larsson, 1998) mapping function between 
DAMSL and MAP TASK, in the area of asserts and re- 
quests. However, the assumption that different ag 
sets tend to partition the same range o/ phenomena 
at different levels o/ granularity, in much the same 
way two taxonomies may mutually differ at the level 
of depth at which (some of) their branches are spec- 
ified, is unwarranted. In fact, different annotation 
schemes take different analytical perspectives on di- 
alogue phenomena, nd end up with carving them 
up into different categories. This situation typically 
produces many-to-many tag correspondences. 
In a pilot experiment, we used four different 
dialogue-act schemes 2 to annotate a small corpus of 
five English task-oriented dialogues,  All dialogues 
were manually tagged by two different annotators 
with all annotation schemes. We then counted, for 
any pair of tags tA and tB in the tag sets A and B, 
how many times they are found to mark the same 
2The annotation schemes considered are: DA~SL (Allen 
and Core, 1997), DAMSL-Switchboard (Jurafsky, Shriberg, 
and Biasca, 1997), VZRSMOmL 2 (Alexandersson et al, 1998), 
and the HCKC MAP TASK annotation scheme (Carletta et al, 
1996). 
3Sources: a human-human dialogue on room furnishing, 
from the COCONUT corpus (di Eugenio, Jordan, and Pylkkae- 
hen, 1997); a human-human dialogue of appointment schedul- 
ing, from the VERBMOBIL corpus (Alexandersson et al, 1998); 
one human-human dialogue of instruction giving, from the 
MAP TASK corpus (Carletta st al., 1996); one human-machine 
dialogue containing travel information, from the TOOT corpus 
(see http : / /~ .  ?s. tund. edu/users/traum/DSD/hvl ? tml); 
one WOZ dialogue on interactive problem solving, from 
the TRAINS COrpUS (see ht tp: / /vvv.cs . rochester .edu:80 
/ re-search/tra ins/armor at 2 on). 
77 
MAPTASK 
DAMSL 
assert 
reassert 
open-option 
offer 
cony-opening 
info-request 
q 
e u q 
x e u 
P c r e 
1 h y r 
a e y 
i c y 
n k n w 
0.43 0.02 0.01 
0.5 0.5 - 
0.2 0.17 0.42 
0.42 0.1 0.2 0.26 
0.5 0.5 - 
0.12 0.34 0.54 
Table 1: Many-to--many mapping I 
token utterance. This measure is proportional to 
the degree of translatability between tag sets, and 
provides a firmer ground for assessing their level of 
correspondence than sheer inspection of tag defini- 
tions does. Results of the experiment show that 
the prevalent pattern of correspondence is, in fact, 
many-to-many. Table 1 illustrates this point, show- 
ing the actual correspondences between DAMSL and 
MAP TASK, in the common area of asserts and re- 
quests. For each slot of table 1 at the crossing of 
DAMSL tag tD and MAP TASK tag tM, we report he 
averaged number of times an utterance labeled as 
tD is alSO assigned tM, divided by the total number 
of utterances tagged as tD. These figures show two 
things. First, Larsson's mappings reflect prevalent 
patterns of tag correspondence only partially. Sec- 
ondly, such patterns are far from being exhaustive 
of the range of possible use of the tags involved. To 
give but one example, out of 10 utterances tagged 
as MAP TASK Explain in one of our test dialogues, 9
are tagged as DAMSL Assert, 6 as DAMSL Offer, and 3 
as DAMSL Open-option. We conclude that Larsson's 
approach is useful to uncover degrees of correspon- 
dence between tag sets, but is still too shallow to 
shed light on the nature of this correspondence. 
Let us now compare MAP TASK and VERBMOBIL. 
Both schemes are mono-dimensional, meaning that 
they assign only one tag per utterance. Yet, this 
does not seem to simplify their pattern of correspon- 
dence, which turns out to be, once more, many-to- 
many, as illustrated in table 2. Consider, for exam- 
ple, the relationship between MAP TASK Neply-y and 
VERBMOBIL Accept and Feedback-positive. Neply-y 
is almost exclusively concerned with the linguistic 
form of an utterance, while VERBMOBIL Accept and 
Feedback-positive are mainly based on the relation- 
ship between a reply and the propositional content 
of the utterance being replied to. This important 
difference is levelled out when one tries to represent 
it as a mapping function from the MAP TASK tag set 
onto the tag set of VERBMOBIL. A more promising 
a r 
MAPTASK C e 
k p 
n 1 
I y 
d 
VERBMOBIL  g y 
accept 0.77 0.23 
feedbck-positive 0.34 0.46 
backchannel 0.45 
0.2 
0.45 
Table 2: Many-to-many mapping II 
key to an understanding ofthe intricate relationship 
between I~AP TASK and VERBMOBIL can be found 
when things are looked at from a purely recognition- 
based perspective. It turns out that the dimensions 
of information implicitly called upon in the defini- 
tion of most existing dialogue tag sets are consider- 
ably varied. To limit ourselves to some of the tags in 
table 2, such dimensions range from syntax (RepJy- 
y) to propositional content (Feedback-positive) and 
co-te, xt (Accept). Many-to-many mapping can thus 
be viewed as the result of the following situation: i) 
for each tag set, tags are defined in relation to their 
relevance to an intended goal (be it practical or the- 
oretical); ii) the definition calls upon a number of 
relatively independent classificatory dimensions; iii) 
neither all tags in the same tag set nor tags belong- 
ing to different schemes consistently share the same 
dimensions. This situation is illustrated in more de- 
tall in the following sections. 
4 Recogn i t ion -based  comparab i l i ty  
The classificatory dimensions selected in this section 
for a recognition-based comparison are simply those 
more consistently (however implicitly) assumed for 
tag definition by the dialogue-acts community. In 
particular, each dimension in the list below covers 
a specific level of information taken as criterial for 
tag-assignment i  the tag definitions overviewed in 
our pilot experiment: 
? D1, Grammat ica l  in format ion:  tag- 
assignment presupposes availability of mor- 
phosyntactic, syntactic, prosodic and lexical in- 
formation (limited to grammatical words only): 
see, for example, wh-questions and yes-/no- 
questions in SWITCHBOARD 
? D2 ,  In fo rmat ion  about  lexical and se- 
mant ic  content :  tag-assignment presupposes 
knowledge about he propositional content of an 
utterance, e.g. in terms of its logical structure, 
topic representation, i ter-clausal dependencies 
within the utterance and occurrence of seman- 
tically full words (as opposed to grammatical 
words): see, for example, the category Assert 
78 
in DAMSL, defined as a truth-conditional claim 
about the world 
* D3, Co-textual  information:  tag- 
assignment presupposes knowledge of the pre- 
vious/following utterance(s) (see all "backward- 
looking, or responsive categories) 
. D4~ Pragmat ic  information:  tag-assignment 
requires knowledge of the context of the 
dialogue: e.g. the social relationship of 
speaker/hearer, the physical setting of the in- 
teraction, the specific domain talked about etc.: 
this is the case of indirect speech acts, such 
as I'm cold, tagged as an order when used to 
mean Close the window. 
By way of illustration, table 3 below provides a 
recognition-based interpretation of tags in DAMSL, 
SWITCHBOARD, MAP TASK and VERBMOBIL, re- 
lated to Searle's class of Representatives. 
Category & Scheme 
Assert (DAMSL) 
Statement (SWBD) 
Explain (MAPTASK) 
Inform (VERBMOBIL) 
D1 D2 D3 D4 
4- -t- -t- 
-I- -I- 
-I- d- -t- 
? -I- -t- -F 
Table 3: Assert Categories vs Dimensions 
An Assert in DAMSL is an utterance "whose pri- 
mary intention is to make claims about the world, 
also in the weaker form of hypothesizing or suggest- 
ing that something might be true" (Allen and Core, 
1997). A typical Assert, thus, will be realized with a 
declarative clause type and a specific prosodic on- 
tour (D1 in table 3); moreover, an Assert is defined 
as an utterance whose propositional content is truth- 
conditional (D2) and has new informational status 
(D3). 
The general category Statement in SWITCHBOARD 
(Jurafsky, Shriberg, and Biasca, 1997) is mainly 
identified on the basis of lexical and grammati- 
cal information, more or less of the kind required 
for Assert in DAMSL. In particular, a Statement- 
non-opinion requires co-occurrence of first-person 
personal pronouns (D1), and of a personal story 
as the content of the utterance (D2). Similarly, 
a Statement-opinion presupposes verbs expressing 
opinion such as "think" and "believe" (D1) and a 
personal opinion as the content of the utterance 
(D2). The Explain category in MAP TASK is defined 
as an utterance "stating information which has not 
been elicited by the partner" (Carletta et al, 1996). 
Thus, recognition of an instance of Explain involves, 
besides lexico-grammatical lues about the linguis- 
tic form of an utterance (D1), also consideration of
adjacency-pairs constraints (D3). D4 is also indi- 
rectly invoked to disambiguate between a true Ex- 
plain and a declarative utterance used as an order 
(Instruct). Finally, Inform in VERBMORIL (Alexan- 
dersson et al, 1998) is defined as a default tag, to 
be used when other tags fail to apply. This makes it 
reasonable to ground Inform on "all awailable dimen- 
sions of analysis at the stone time. 
Analytical dimensions are also called upon differ- 
ently within the same tag set. This is illustrated in 
Table 4 for the MAP TASK tags. 
Explain 
Instruc~ 
Query-yn 
Query-w 
Check 
Align 
Reply-y 
Reply-n 
Reply-w 
Acknowledge 
Clarify 
D1 D2 D3 D4 
-t- -I- 
+ 
+ + 
+ -t- 
-t- + 
-F + + 
-t- -I- -b 
-F -I- -}- 
-t- -i- 
-F -t- 
+ + 
-t- 
d- 
Table 4: Dimensions in MAPTASK 
Recognition of an Instruct  move is predominantly 
based on grammatical factors; however, pragmatic 
knowledge is also invoked in case of indirect r(.~ 
quests. Quety-yn and Query -w moves are mainly tie- 
fined in terms of their grammatical form, together 
with knowledge of the following response (hence D3). 
To apply a Check tag to an utterance, an annotator 
must look for an interrogative form (D1), an ini- 
tiative value and an old informational status (D3); 
finally, an inference about the mental state of the 
speaker (D4) is also required. Recognition of an 
Align move relies on the following clues: surface 
indicators of the utterance being a request (gener- 
ally prosodic fat%ors), a limited set of words such as 
"okay", "right" etc. (D2), the fac% that the utterance 
closes a sequence of turns whereby some informa- 
tion has been exchanged (D3). All the five respon- 
sive categories presuppose knowledge of the previous 
move(s) in a dialogue (D3). Furthermore, identifi- 
cation of Replies-y, Replies-n, and Replies-w is ba-sed 
both on the occurrence of specific prosodic ontoum 
(e.g. a non-rising one) and on the intended proposi- 
tional content of the utterance (D2). The same holds 
for Acknowledge and Clarify which, in "addition, are 
more strictly defined in relation to specific lexical 
items (D2) and to the content of the utterance these 
moves respond to (D3). 
79 
To sum up, we find the projection plots of ta- 
bles 3 and 4 an insightful way of making explicit the 
range of analytical variability among tags i) of dif- 
ferent schemes and ii) within the same scheme. Two 
tags lying close along one dimension of analysis can 
easily turn out to be diametrically opposed along 
another dimension. Only by teasing out the mul- 
tiple recognition-based dimensions called upon in 
the definition of each tag, we can gain some insights 
into the pattern of their correspondence, and eventu- 
ally sharpen up scheme comparability considerably. 
A multidimensional recognition-based meta-scheme 
was designed to achieve this purpose, as detailed in 
the following section. 
5 The  meta -scheme 
To construct our meta-scheme, we took the classifi- 
catory dimensions D1-D4 introduced in the previous 
section as a basis for the definition of four indepen- 
dent taxonomies of utterance tags, some of which 
consist, in their turn, of further sub-dimensions, as 
detailed in the following paragraphs. 
D I :  Grammat ica l  In fo rmat ion  This includes 
the set of morpho-syntactic, prosodic and lexical 
clues, traditionally referred to as "illocutionary force 
indicating devices" (Searle, 1969). They range from 
verb mood (indicative vs. imperative) and word or- 
der (e.g., subject inversion) to prosodic tone (rising 
vs. falling) and lexico-grammatical markers (do- 
auxiliaries, wh-words, etc.). 
The tag values specified along this dimension in- 
dicate the illocutionary intention of an utterance as 
a function of grammatical information only: 
? Assert 
? Request 
- Request-Imperative 
- Request-Interrogative 
* Request-wh 
* Request-y/n 
* Request-or 
* Exclamation 
Tag values are defined as follows. 
Assert: if an utterance is of a declarative 
clause type (with a final falling tone and an un- 
marked SVO order), then it should be tagged as 
an Assert, whose recognizable illocutionary force 
can be paraphrased as a "claim about the world 
(where the world includes the speaker). Ac- 
cording to our definition, the following utter- 
ances should be tagged as D1 Asserts  (real ex- 
amples): I lost a chair; Not a problem with 
the time; the lamp and table sound good; so 
I think we're done; This is the AT&T Amtrak 
train schedule system; Yes, No. 
Request :  if an utterance instantiates an imper- 
ative or interrogative clause type, then it should 
be tagged as a Request, whose typical illocutionary 
force is an attempt by the speaker to get the hearer 
to do something (classical Directives). The follow- 
ing utterances should thus be tagged as R,equests at 
D1 (real examples): Do you know the time?; Te l l  
me the time; Go to Corning; Turn right; Could 
you pass me the salt?. 
Exc lamat ion :  if an utterance iustantiates an ex- 
clamative chmse type, then it should be tagged as 
an Exclamation, whose typical illocutionary force is 
the expression of a particular state of mind of the 
speaker, as in the following examples: Hi!; Sorry; 
Right! (uttered with the appropriate intonation); 
Of  course  !. 
D2: Semant ic  In fo rmat ion  This dimension 
serves the purpose of characterizing an utterance in 
terms of its propositional and lexical content. We 
can further specify three classificatory subdimen- 
sions, reflecting three independent aspects of seman- 
tic information at the utterance level. 
? "D2.1: Truth-condit ional l ty The following val- 
ues of this attribute label an utterance as having a 
truth-conditionM propositiomd content or not: 
- truth-cond 
- ntruth-cond 
? D2 .2 :  Po la r i ty  
- Pos i t i ve :  the speaker asserts omething, as in 
Yes ,  or  I th ink  so. 
- Negat ive :  the speaker denies something, ~Ls 
in  No,  or  I don ' t  th ink  so .  
? D2.3 Performative: this tag says that an ut- 
terance contains an explicit performative, ~ in I 
promise . . . ,  I suggest . . ,  etc. 
D3: Co- textua l  In fo rmat ion  Co-textual infor- 
mation has to do with the relationship of an ut- 
terance with previous or following utterances in a 
discourse. This dimension is criterial for, e.g., tag- 
ging an utterance as a reply. Also distinctions refer- 
ring to the informational status of an utterance, i.e. 
whether it conveys new or old information, are to bc 
encoded "along this dimension. This dimension also 
includes information about the degree of cornplian(:(: 
of a reply with its corresponding initiative. 
? D3.1: Adjacency Pa i rs  
- Initiative: the utterance prompts an expec- 
tation 
- Reply: the utterance fulfills ~m expectation 
? D3 .2 :  Compl iance  
- Compliant: the utterance fulfills the expec- 
tation set up by a previous utterance in the 
expected way 
80 
- Non-Compliant: the utterance fulfills the 
expectation set up by a previous utterance in 
an unexpected/dlspreferred way 
? D3.3:  P resuppos i t ion  
-New:  the utterance provides information 
which is new to the hearer 
-O ld :  the utterance provides information 
which is old to the hearer 
D4:  P ragmat ic  In fo rmat ion  This dimension 
characterizes an utterance on the basis of pragmatic 
information, i.e. knowledge of the social relation- 
ship between speaker/hearer, the physical setting of 
the interaction, the topic of the dialogue tc. Two 
sub-<limensions are identified here: 
? D4.1:  I l l ocut ionary  Force  
- Representative 
- Directive 
- Commissive 
- Expressive 
These represent he classical top categories of 
Searle's typology of speech acts (Searle, 1969). The 
possibility of further specify them is left open. 
? D4,2:  task  vs  communicat ion  
- Task 
- Communication 
This sub-dimension is intended to capture the 
traditional distinction between utterances used to 
perform a task, and utterances whose main func- 
tion is smoothing and ensuring the communication 
process as such. Thus, for instance, utterances 
such as Is there a train at Avon? or I want 
to go to Boston are clearly task-related, while ut- 
terances such as Can you hear me? or I don't 
understand you are communication-based. 
5.1 The meta -scheme at work  
How do tags in the meta-scheme relate to the tags 
in DAMSL, SWITCHBOARD, MAP TASK and VERm 
MOBIL? What  does this relationship tell us about 
the degree of similarity between the annotation 
schemes? An objective way of addressing these ques- 
tions is to use the meta-scheme itself for labeling 
all five dialogues in the pilot experiment of section 
3, to then assess the degree of scheme correspon- 
dence in terms of the number of utterances which 
are found to be marked up with the same tags, sim- 
ilarly to what was done in section 3. Note that the 
use of a meta-scheme to tag a dialogue should not 
suggest that the meta-scheme is, as such, an ad- 
equate tool for annotation. First, tags are largely 
under-specified. Moreover, the focus of annotation 
Dl:req-wh 
D2: req- in fo  D3.1 : I  
D4:d i rec t  
D l :asser t  
D2.1 : t ru thcond 
D3.1:R D3.2:ncomp 
D4:represent  
D l :asser t  
D2.1:ntruthcond 
D3.1:R V3.2:corap 
D4:represent  
u: what t ime would 
eng ine  two and three 
leave Elmira? 
s: ye l l  they ' re  not  
schedu led  yet  
s:  but we can send them 
at  any t ime we rant  
Table 5: Sample annotation 
is shifted here from the identification ofprimary illo- 
cutionary acts to the recognizable inguistic and con- 
textual clues for their identification. We will return 
to this important point in the following section. Ta- 
ble 5 exemplifies the annotation of a dialogue xcerpt 
(two turns, three utterances) with the categories in 
the ineta-scheme. 
Table 6 reports the degree of multidimensional 
similarity between MAP TASK Explain, on the one 
hand, and DAMSL Assert, Re-Assert, Open-Option, 
Offer and Info-Request on the other hand. In the 
table, each tag is represented as a point in the n- 
dimensional space staked out by the meta-scheme. 
The first column gives the invariant meta-scheme 
tags which are shared by all utterances tagged as 
Explain. A dash ('-') in the column signifies that 
tags vary along the corresponding dimension: this 
means that the dimension is not criterial for the def- 
inition of Explain. This is the case of D2.2 (polar- 
ity), D3.2 (compliance) and D4.1 (pragmatic illocu- 
tionary force). In the remaining columns, we put 
'=' to signify dimensional equivalence, i.e. identity 
of invariant meta-scheme tags, and '~'  to express 
diversity. Once more, a dash is used to indicate that 
the corresponding dimension is orthogonal to the in- 
formation conveyed by the tag. Intuitively, the tags 
more similar to Explain are those with more '=' and 
fewer '~'  in the corresponding column. 
Note that Assert turns out to be the tag with the 
highest number of matching dimensions ('='), and 
the lowest number of mismatches ('~'). This ex- 
plains why MAP TASK Explain is the most natural 
candidate for replacing DAMSL Assert, as suggested 
by Larsson. We can now give reasons for that: As- 
sert differs from Explain in that the former, unlike 
the latter, conveys no stable initiative force. Note 
further, however, that Explain is not defined along 
dimension D4.1, which, in turn, defines tags such as 
Open-option, Offer and Info-Request. This suggests 
that Explain is also likely to replace these tags when 
they are assigned to assertive and truth conditional 
81 
D1 
D2.1 
D2.2 
D3.1 
D3.2 
D3.3 
D4.1 
D4.2 
e r x e o i p a a P n 
l s s e o f 
s s n f o 
a e e o f r 
i r r P e e 
n t t t r q 
assert ----. = = 
truth-cond -- -- -- 
Init = -- -- 
new = 
task 
Table 6: Multidimensional tag correspondences 
utterances, that is when these utterances happen to 
meet the criteria for identification of Exp la in .  Inci- 
dentally, it should be noted that the evidence of table 
6 provides a justification of the figures reported in 
table 1, which would otherwise remain counterintu- 
itive in the light of tag definitions. 
6 Annotat ion  and  meta-scheme 
As already pointed out above, the meta-scheme pro- 
posed here does not per se fulfill some important 
prerequisites for an annotation scheme. It is useful, 
at this stage, to elaborate this point. First, mul- 
tidimensionality and orthogonality of the assumed 
multiple dimensions seem to be operationally cum- 
bersome and, in general, detract from reliability in 
actual tagging practice. Furthermore, in the meta- 
scheme all classificatory dimensions are conceived 
of as being on a par. This means that we delib- 
erately make no assumption as to what dimension 
of annotation ultimately provides information about 
the primary intended illocutionary act of an utter- 
ance, and how information along one dimension re- 
lates to information encoded at another dimension. 
This is not very informative from the point of view 
of annotation, but represents a very useful feature 
for scheme customization, as it makes it possible to 
modify/adapt an existing annotation scheme by col- 
lapsing some analytical dimensions in a controlled 
way. 
Finally, it should be appreciated that the list of 
dimensions provided here is not meant to be either 
exhaustive or minimal, in the sense that every tag 
should be classified along each dimension. Other 
possible dimensions of analysis can include, for ex- 
ample, kinesic information, to account for dialogue 
acts performed through non-verbal communicative 
behavior, such as nodding, smiling and pointing. 
As long as dimensions are rigorously defined, this 
should clarify the intended use of a scheme consid- 
erably. 
7 Conc lus ion  
Tag sets are typically developed to respond to spe- 
cific applications and practical usages, without both- 
ering too much about how the tags themselves relate 
to the nature of information eeded for their assign- 
ment in context. This is fine as long as tag sets are 
assessed in relation to the use they were originally 
intended for, but much less so if one wants to eval- 
uate the extent o which one tag set translates into 
another tag set, or to assess the usability of a given 
tag set for other purposes/applications. 
The multi-dimensional recognition-based meta- 
scheme described in these pages makes it explicit 
how intentions relate to the linguistic and contex- 
tual information eeded for their identification. We 
showed that this is extremely helpful for scheme 
comparison, as it sheds light on the precise nature of 
tag correspondences, well beyond the intuitive grasp 
provided by tag definitions. 
Preliminary experiments show that a translation 
of a dialogue tagged with an existing scheme into our 
meta-scheme is also a useful exercise to assess the in- 
ternal consistency of the annotated material. If this 
is confirmed, then use of the meta-scheme should 
improve scheme design considerably, and should be 
able to provide procedural and testable guide-lines 
for dialogue annotators. 
Re ferences  
Alexandersson, J. B. Buschbeck-Wolf, T. Fujinami, 
M. Kipp, S. Koch, E. Maier, N. Reithinger, 
B. Schmitz, and M. Siegel. 1998. Dialogue Acts in 
Verbmobil-2, Second Edition. Verbmobil Report 
226, DFKI Saarbruecken, Universitaet Stuttgart, 
TU Berlin, Universitaet des Saarlandes. 
Allen, J. and M. Core. 1997. Draft of DAMSL: Di- 
alog Act Markup in Several Layers. Technical re- 
port, Rochester. 
Carletta, J., A. Isard, S. Isard, J. Kowtko, 
G. Doherty-Sneddon, and A. Anderson. 1996. 
HGRC Dialogue Structure Coding Manual. Tech- 
nical Report HCRC TR-82, Human Communica- 
tion Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, Scotland. 
Core, M. and J. Allen. 1997. "Coding Dialogs with 
the DAMSL Annotation Scheme". In Proceedings 
of the AAAI  Fall 1997 Symposium. 
di Eugenic, B., P. W. Jordan, and L. Pylkkaenen. 
1997. The COCONUT project: dialogue annota- 
tion manual Technical report. 
Ichikawa, A., M. Araki, M. Ishizaki, S. Itabashi, 
T. Itch, H. Kashioka, K. Kato, H. Kikuehi, T. Ku- 
magai, A. Kurematsu, H. Koiso, M. Tamoto, 
S. Tutiya, S. Nakazato, Y. Horiuchi, K. Maekawa, 
82 
Y. Yamashita, and T. Yoshimura. 1998. "Stan- 
dardising Annotation Schemes for Japanese Dis- 
course". In Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua- 
tion, Granada, Spain, pp. 731-736. 
Jurafsky, D., L. Shriberg, and D. Biasea. 1997. 
Switchboard SWBD-DAMSL, Shallow-Discourse- 
Function Annotation; Coders Manual, Drab 13. 
Klein, M., N. O. Bemsen, S. Davies, L. Dybkjaer, 
J. Garrido, H. Kaseh, A. Mengel, V. Pirrelli, 
M. Poesio, S. Quazza, and C. Sofia. 1998. Sup- 
ported Coding Schemes. Technical Report DI.1, 
MATE. 
Larsson, S. 1998. Coding schemas \]or dialogue 
moves. Technical report, Department of Linguis- 
tics, Goeteborg University. 
Poesio, M. and D. Traum. 1998. "Towards an Ax- 
iomatization of Dialogue Acts". In Proceedings 
of the Twente Workshop on the Formal Seman- 
tics and Pragmatics of Dialogues, Enschede, The 
Netherlands, pp. 207-222. 
Poesio, M., Cooper, R., Larsson, S., Traum, D. and 
C. Matheson. 1999. "Annotating Conversations 
for Information State Updates". Paper presented 
at Amstelogue99. 
Searle, J. 1969. Speech Acts. Cambridge University 
Press 
J 
? 83  
