! 
Hybrid Disambiguation of 
Prepositional Phrase Attachment and Interpretation 
Sven Hart rumpf  
Applied Computer Science VII (AI) 
University of Hagen 
58084 Hagen, Germany 
Sven.Hartrumpf@fernuni-hagen.de 
Abst rac t  
In this paper, a hybrid disambiguation method 
for the prepositional phrase (PP) attachment 
and interpretation problem is presented. 1 The 
data needed, semantic PP interpretation rules 
and an annotated corpus, is described first. 
Then the three major steps of the disambigua- 
tion method are: explained. Cross-validated 
evaluation results', for German (88.6-94.4% cor- 
rect for binary attachment ambiguities, 83.3- 
92.5% correct for interpretation ambiguities) 
show that disambiguation methods combin- 
ing interpretation! rules and statistical methods 
might yield significantly better esults than non- 
hybrid disambiguation methods. 
1 In t roduct ion 
The problem of prepositional phrase (PP) at- 
tachment ambigu!ty is one of the most famous 
problems in natural anguage processing (NLP). 
In recent years, many statistical solutions have 
been proposed: lexical associations (see (Hin- 
dle and Rooth, 1993)); error-driven transfor- 
mation learning (see (Brill and Resnik, 1994), 
extensions by (Ye h and Vilain, 1998)); backed- 
off estimation (see (Collins and Brooks, 1995), 
extended to the multiple PP attachment prob- 
lem by (Merlo et al, 1997)); loglinear model 
(see (Franz, 1996b), (Franz, 1996a, pp. 97- 
108)); maximum:entropy model (see (Ratna- 
parkhi, 1998; Ratnaparkhi et al, 1994)). 
The disambiguation method in this paper has 
two key features: First, it tries to solve the 
1This disambiguation method was developed for an 
NLI in the Virtuelle Wissensfabrik ( Virtual Knowledge 
Factory, see (Knoll et al, 1998)), a project funded by 
the German state Nordrhein-Westfalen, which supported 
this research in part. I would like to thank Rainer Oss- 
wald and the anonymous reviewers for their useful com- 
ments and suggestions. 
PP attachment problem and the PP interpre- 
tation problem. Second, it is hybrid as it com- 
bines more traditional PP interpretation rules 
and statistical methods. 
2 Data  
2.1 PP interpretation rules 
One central component for the disambigua- 
tion method presented in this paper are se- 
mantic interpretation rules for PPs. A PP 
interpretation rule consists of a premise and 
a conclusion. The premise of an inter- 
pretation rule describes under which condi- 
tions the PP interpretation specified by the 
rule's conclusion can be valid. Two example 
rules for the local and contents interpretation 
of 'fiber' ( 'about'/ 'above'/ 'on'/ 'over'/ 'via'/ . . .)  
are shown in Figure 1. As (at least) five more 
interpretations of 'fiber' are possible, the ambi- 
guity degree for the interpretation of such a PP 
is (at least) seven. 
The premise of a rule is a set of feature struc- 
ture constraints (including negated and disjunc- 
tive constraints and defining an underspecified 
feature structure) that refer to the following fea- 
tures of the preposition's ister NP (nominal 
phrase) and the preposition's mother NP or V 
(verb). (The features that are only refered to 
for the sister NP are marked by an S.) 
case (S) syntactic ase: genitive, dative, and 
accusative for German PPs 
num (S) syntactic number: singular and plu- 
ral in German 
sort a semantic sort value (atomic or dis- 
junctive value) from a predefined ontol- 
ogy (see (Helbig and Schulz, 1997)) com- 
prising 45 sorts. The most important 
111 
id fiber.loc id fiber.mcont 
explanation cl is/happens above the location of explanation cl contains information about the 
c2. topic described by c2. 
examples 'Flugzeuge fiber Seen' ('air planes examples 'Bficher fiber Seen' ('books on 
above lakes'), ... lakes'), ... 
premise cl (sort (dis object situation)) premise cl (sort (dis object situation)) 
(info +) 
c2 (case dat) (sort concrete-object) c2 (case acc) (sort object) 
conclusion net (loc cl c3) (*ueber c3 c2) conclusion net (mcont cl c2) 
The semantic network node cl corresponds tothe mother, the node c2 to the sister, and c3 etc. are additional 
nodes. A disjunction of feature values is introduced by dis. 
Figure 1: PP interpretation rules for two interpretations of 'fiber' 
sorts for nouns axe object and its sub- 
sorts con-object (concrete object, with sub- 
sorts dis-object (discrete object) and sub- 
stance) and abs-object (abstract object, 
with subsorts tem-abstractum (temporal 
abstractum), abs-situation (abstract situ- 
ation), attribute, etc . ) .  Verbs can belong 
to sort stat-situation (static situation) or 
sort dyn-situation (dynamic situation, with 
subsorts action and event). A disjunctive 
value represents a concept family (as intro- 
duced by (Bierwisch, 1983); closely related 
axe dotted types, see for example (Buitelaax, 
1998)), e.g., the noun 'book' comprises a
physical object variant and an abstract in- 
formation variant. 
etype  extension type for distinguishing indi- 
viduals ('child', 'table'), sets of individuals 
('men', 'group', 'people'), etc. 
The rest of the features are semantic Boolean 
features as shown in Table 1. 2 
The conclusion of a rule is a semantic inter- 
pretation of the PP, which can be valid if the 
premise is satisfied by the sister and the mother. 
The rules' semantic representation uses a mul- 
tilayered extended semantic network formalism 
(MESNET, see for example (Helbig and Schulz, 
1997)), which has been successfully applied in 
various areas (e. g., in the Virtual Knowledge 
Factory, see (Knoll et al, 1998)). 
Besides the premise and the conclusion, 
2Of course, other sets of such features are possible; 
the choice was made by selecting relevant features from 
the set of semantic features in an existent German inher- 
itance lexicon (see (Haxtrumpf and Schulz, 1997)), which 
contains 7000 lexemes and is used by the disambiguation 
method. 
each rule contains a mnemonic identifier like 
in.loc (which consists of the preposition's ortho- 
graphic form followed by an abbreviation de- 
rived from the semantic interpretation i  the 
conclusion), a short explanation, and a set of 
example sentences that can be interpreted us- 
ing this rule. 
From a set of rules for 160 German preposi- 
tions collected by (Tjaden, 1996), all rules for 
six important (i. e., frequent) prepositions were 
taken as a starting point for development and 
evaluation of a hybrid disambiguation method. 
Sentences were retrieved from a development 
test corpus to refine these rules. 
2.2 Corpus  
While PP interpretation rules form the rule 
component  of the hybrid disambiguation 
method, an annotated corpus serves as the 
source of the s tat i s t ica l  component .  For 
each preposition under investigation, a number 
of candidate sentences that possibly show at- 
tachment ambiguity for this preposition were 
automatically extracted from a corpus. This 
corpus is based on the online version of the 
Sfiddeutsche Zeitung, starting from August 
1997. The corpus is marked up according to 
the Corpus Encoding Standard (see (Ide et al, 
1996)) and word, sentence, and paragraph iden- 
tifiers are assigned. 
The preposition in a candidate sentence 
is semiautomatically annotated with five at- 
tributes: 
s ister  The position of the right-most word of 
the preposition's ister NP. Postnominal 
genitive NPs modifying the main sister NP 
are included in this annotation. 
112 
feature name description of entities with positive (+) value examples 
animate (S) 
geogr 
human 
info 
instit 
instru (S) 
legper 
mental 
method 
potag 
an animate ntity 
a geographical concept 
a human entity 
an entity that carries information 
an institution 
an entity that can be used as an instrument 
a legal person 
a mental state or process 
a method 
a (potential) agent 
'animal', 'person', 'tree' 
'city', 'country' 
'child', 'president' 
'book', 'concert' 
'company', parliament' 
'hammer', ladder' 
'company', woman' 
'fear', 'happiness' 
'compression', 'filtering' 
'horse', 'man' 
Table 1: Semantic Boolean features in PP interpretation rules 
i 
mother  The position of the syntactic head 
word of the mother NP or V. 
amother  The list: of a l te rnat ive  mothers  
represented byilthe position of the syntactic 
head word of an NP or V. An alternative 
mother is a syntactically possible mother 
distinct from the (correct) mother. All al- 
ternative mothers plus the (correct) mother 
form the set of cand idate  mothers  for PP 
attachment. 
c-id A character string that identifies the se- 
mantic reading of the preposition and cor- 
responds to the identifier in a PP interpre- 
tation rule (sea Figure 1). 
c A character string for comments and docu- 
mentation purposes. 
The preposition in corpus sentence (1) is anno- 
tated as shown by the SGML element in (2). 
The meaning of this annotation can be illus- 
trated as in (3): th'e PP's sister ends at 'Seite'; 
the PP attaches to: 'gebaut', and could syntac- 
tically also be attached to the NP with head 
'Depot' or the NP ~ith head 'Museums'; the in- 
terpretation of the ~PP is a local one (auf.loc). 3
(1) Und wieso wird das neue Depot 
And why is the new depot 
des De utsch-Deutschen 
the+GEN German-German 
Museums huff bayerischer Seite 
Museum on~ Bavarian side 
3please note that the translations ofsentences (1) and 
(4) are not ambiguous: 
gebaut, nachdem die Planungen fiir 
built, after the plannings for 
die Thiiringer Talseite schon 
the Thuringian valley-side already 
fertig waren? 
ready were? 
'And why is the new depot of the 
German-German Museum built on the 
Bavarian side, after the planning for the 
Thuringian side of the valley has already 
been completed?' 
(2) 19971002bay_c.p3.s2.w10 (article bay_c, 
1997-10-02, paragraph 3, sentence 2, word 
10): (w c-id="auf.loc" sister=" 12" 
mother=" 13" amother--"6/9")auf(/w) 
(3) Und wieso wird das neue Depot  al des 
Deutsch-Deutschen Museums a2 
auf  auf'l?c bayerischer Seite s gebaut  m, 
nachdem die Planungen ffir die Thfiringer 
Talseite schon fertig waren? 
The annotation process is semiautomatic: the 
machine guesses the attribute values follow- 
ing some heuristics; these guesses have to be 
checked and possibly extended or corrected by 
a human annotator. This kind of annotation, of 
course, is labor-intensive. But due to the devel- 
opment of an Tcl /Tk annotation tool optimized 
for manual annotation speed, the average an- 
notation time per candidate sentence dropped 
under 30 seconds. Furthermore, the following 
sections how that a small set of annotated sen- 
tences achieves promising results for PP attach- 
ment and interpretation. The lexicon (see foot- 
note 2) had to be extended for the nouns and 
113 
verbs annotated as head words of sisters or can- 
didate mothers that were not in the lexicon and 
could not be analyzed by a compound analysis 
module. 
Some candidate sentences were excluded from 
the investigation because the PP involves a 
problem that is supposed to be solved by other 
NLP modules 4 and could disturb the evaluation 
of the PP disambiguation module (e. g., by pro- 
ducing noise for the statistical part). All exclu- 
sion criteria are listed in Table 2 with percent- 
ages of instances of such exclusions relative to 
the number of candidate sentences. In short, 
sentences are excluded when their PP ambigu- 
ity problem 
? can be solved by separate components (for 
support verb constructions and idioms) or 
? can only be solved if the PP attachment 
and interpretation is supported by another 
component (for complex named entities, el- 
lipsis resolution, and foreign language x- 
pressions). 
The first 120 non-excluded candidate sen- 
tences for each preposition were chosen and ran- 
domally split into eight parts for cross valida- 
tion. Eight evaluations were carried out with 
one part being the evaluation test corpus and 
the remaining seven parts being the evaluation 
training corpus. 
Sometimes, it makes no semantic difference 
whether a PP in a sentence attaches to an NP 
or a V. This is known as systematic ambiguity 
(or systematic indeterminacy, see (Hindle and 
Rooth, 1993, p. 112)). Two subtypes of this 
phenomenon are systematic locative ambiguity 
(see corpus sentence (4)) and systematic con- 
tents ambiguity. 
(4) Bis ein Besche id  ml aus  aus'?rigl 
Until a notification from 
Kar l s ruhe  8 eintr i Jyt m2, kann es 
Karlsruhe comes-in, can it 
Monate dauern. 
months take. 
(19971001fern_d.p3.s6.w4) 
'It might take months until a notification 
from Karlsruhe comes in.' 
4It should be evaluated in further research ow well 
such modules olve these problems. 
The frequency of such ambiguities depends 
heavily on the preposition; on the average, there 
were 4.3% cases of systematic ambiguity. 5 For 
English, (Hindle and Rooth, 1993, p. 116) re- 
port that 77 out of 880 sentences (8.75%) were 
systematically ambiguous. In such sentences, 
an attachment can be considered correct if it 
is one of the two attachments connected by 
systematic ambiguity; both parsing results will 
lead to identical results in an NLP application if
it contains ufficiently developed inference com- 
ponents. Table 3 shows for the evaluation cor- 
pus (720 sentences 6) where the PP attaches to 
(columns V, NP1, NP2 (the second closest NP), 
NP3, NP4), how many attachments are syntac- 
tically possible (number of candidate mothers; 
columns labeled 1 to 5), and how frequent sys- 
tematic ambiguity is (last column). 
3 HYbr id  d i sambiguat ion  method 
? 3 .1  Bas ic  ideas  
PP attachment is one of the most famous prob- 
lems in NLP. But where a PP attaches to, is 
only half of the story of the PP's contribution 
to an utterance; the other half is how it is to be 
interpreted. And clearly, these two questions are 
not independent. So, why not tackle both prob- 
lems at once, trying to achieve for both prob- 
lems results that are better than the results ob- 
tained by an isolated PP attachment component 
and an isolated PP interpretation component? 
As both problems depend on each other, there 
is the strong hope that this is the case. To in- 
vestigate this hypothesis, uch a disambiguation 
method was developed and evaluated. 
The input to the disambiguation method is 
the feature structure p for the preposition, the 
feature structure s for the parse of the preposi- 
tion's sister NP, and the feature structures cmi 
for the (trivial) parses of the syntactic head 
words of all candidate mothers. The output is 
the mother the PP is to be attached to and the 
? interpretation the preposition plus the sister NP 
contribute to the meaning of the enclosing sen- 
tence. 
The overall structure of this disambiguation 
method comprises three steps. First, all sets 
5All annotated sentences showing systematic ambi- 
guity contain only the two candidate mothers that are 
related by the underlying systematic ambiguity. 
6These annotated sentences are available for research. 
114 
short name description % of tokens 
cne-amother amother is a complex named entity (titles of books, etc.) 0.1 
cne-mother mother is a complex named entity (titles of books, etc.) 0.4 
cne-sister sister is a complex named entity (titles of books, etc.) 0.6 
ell-amother amother is elliptic 0.1 
ell-mother mother is elliptic 0.1 
ell-sister I sister is elliptic 0.5 
fle-amother amother is a foreign language xpression 0.1 
fie-mother mother is a foreign language xpression 0.1 
idi-amother amother is an idiom (or part of an idiom) 0.1 
idi-moth~r mother is an idiom 0.4 
idi-pp PP is an idiom 3.6 
idi-pp-mother PP plus mother is an idiom 0.9 
idi-pp-v. PP plus verb is an idiom 0.5 
problem unclassified problem 0.7 
svc PP is part of a support verb construction 0.5 
svc-amo~her amother of the PP is a support verb construction 0.3 
svc-mother mother of the PP is a support verb construction 1.0 
sum 10.1 
Table 2: Exclusion criteria for candidate sentences 
preposition observed attachment % ambiguity degree % sys. amb. % 
V NP1 NP2 NP3 NP4 1 2 3 4 5 
auf 56.7 38.3 5.0 0.0 0.0 13.3 58.3 24.2 2.5 1.7 5.0 
aus 22.5 75.0 2.5 0.0 0.0 35.8 51.7 8.3 4.2 0.0 10.0 
bei 52.5 42.5 5.0 0.0 0.0 30.8 51.7 14.2 1.7 1.7 6.7 
fiber 37.1 57.1 5.0 0.8 0.0 17.5 66.7 13.3 0.8 1.7 2.5 
vor 41.3 52.1 5.0 1.7 0.0 23.3 61.7 13.3 1.6 0.0 0.8 
wegen 62.1 26.3 10.0 1.7 0.0 9.2 74.2 14.2 1.7 0.8 0.8 
average 45.4 48.5 5.4 0.7 0.0 21.7 60.7 14.6 2.1 1.0 4.3 
Table 3: Attachment data from the evaluation corpus 
of possible interpretations PIi of the PP plus a 
given candidate mother cmi are determined by 
applying the PP interpretation rules. Second, 
for each set of possible interpretations PIi, one 
interpretation sii is selected using interpreta- 
tion statistics (on semantics). Third, among all 
selected sii, one interpretation is chosen based 
on attachment statistics (on semantics and syn- 
tax) and additional factors. These steps will be 
presented in more detail in the following three 
subsections. 
3.2 Application of interpretation rules 
Step 1 of the disambiguation method (deter- 
mining possible interpretations PIi) is driven 
by testing the premises of PP interpretation 
rules. From the set of interpretations PIt whose 
rule premises are satisfied, interpretations are 
removed that violate adjunct constraints from 
the lexicon or constraints from the underlying 
semantic formalism 7 (see step 1 in Figure 2). 
~Of course, constraints from the semantic formalism 
could be added to the rules. But this would introduce 
redundancy which would make the rules difficult to de- 
velop and maintain. 
115 
n is the number of possible attachments (cml,  . . . ,  cram). 
m is the number of rules for preposition p (rl, . . . ,  rm). 
1. for each candidate mother cmi 
(a) PIt : {(p, 8, cmi, r j )  I 1 ~ j _< m, premise of rule rj is satisfied by sister s and cmi} 
(b) PIi = set of all (p, s, cmi, r) E PIt which fulfill the following conditions: 
? Semantic relations in the conclusion of r are licensed by compatible relations listed in 
the feature structure cmi, which come from lexical entries (or lexical defaults). 
? Semantic relations in the conclusion of r do not violate the signature constraints that 
are defined for these relations in the underlying semantic network formalism. 
2. for each candidate mother cmi with nonempty PIi 
(a) sii = arg max~ rf(r ,  {rj 13(p, s, cmi, rj) e PIi}), where pi = (p, s, cmi, r) E PIi 
3. for each candidate mother cmi with nonempty PIi 
(a) d = distance in words between candidate mother cmi and the PP (p plus s) 
(b) scoresi~ = rf((r ,  cat(cmi)),  {(rj, cat(cmk)) I 1 < k < n, P!k ? ~, Sik = (p, S, cmk, r j )} )  
+ scoredist(d), where sii = (p, s, cmi, r) 
si = arg maxsi~ scoresi~, where 1 < i < n, PIi ~ 
Figure 2: Disambiguation algorithm 
To simplify Figure 2, the treatment of com- 
plements is excluded. Interpretations that are 
licensed by lexical complement information for 
candidate mothers are also determined in step 1. 
Experiments howed that it is a good strat- 
egy to prefer complement interpretations over 
adjunct interpretations, which are described in 
the following steps, s Attachment cases where 
prepositional objects as complements are in- 
volved are the easy ones for statistical disam- 
biguation techniques (see for example (Hindle 
and Rooth, 1993)); in a hybrid system, one can 
expect such complement information to be in 
the lexicon, at least in part. The problem is al- 
leviated as the interpretation rules (which are 
developed for adjuncts)produce orrect results 
for many complements; but this topic needs fur- 
ther research. 
3.3 In terpreta t ion  d i sambiguat ion  
The result of step 1 can be viewed as an 
attachment-interpretation matrix (aii,j) with 
size n?m.  A matrix element aii,j corresponds 
to attaching the PP to candidate mother cmi 
Sin the rare case of two possible complement inter- 
pretations, the verbal one is prefered. 
under interpretation rj and represents ome 
kind of preference score. 
To solve the attachment and interpretation 
problem (i.e., to select the right matrix ele- 
ment), statistics can be used. There are numer- 
ous statistical approaches ( ee section 1), but in 
the presented approach a statistical component 
is combined with a rule component (see step 1). 
This rule component reduces the degree of am- 
biguity (i. e., marks elements in matrix (aii,j) as 
possible or impossible) and delivers high-level 
semantic information (the possible semantic in- 
terpretations of the PP for a given candidate 
mother) for statistical disambiguation. 
The strategy adopted in this disambiguation 
method is to do the remaining disambiguation 
in two steps: first disambiguate he interpreta- 
tions for each attachment possibility, then dis- 
ambiguate the attachments based on the first 
step's result. So, in step 2 of the disambigua- 
tion method, one interpretation for each can- 
didate mother is chosen. As Table 4 shows, 
most of the time the correct rule fires (given 
the correct mother; see recall column), but false 
rules fire too (see precision column) because in- 
terpretation rules refer only to a limited depth 
116 
preposition readings recall % precision % 
auf 
aus  
bei 
fiber 
vor  
wegen 
9 100.0 100.0 
6 97.4 39.8 
4 93.7 69.8 
7 100.0 65.4 
6 98.3 54.7 
1 100.0 100.0 
Table 4: Results of PP interpretation rules for 
(correct) mothers 
rf(aus.pars, {aus:origl, aus.pars, aus.sourc}) = 1.0 
rf((aus.temp, np), {i(aus.cstr, v), (aus.temp, np)}) ---- 1.0 
Figure 3: Statistical example data for interpre- 
tation and attachment 
of semantics, which can be delivered by realistic 
parsers for nontrivial domains. Therefore, there 
is the need to disambiguate for interpretation. 
Here statistics derived from the annotated cor- 
pus come into play: relative frequencies are cal- 
culated, which serve as estimated probabilities. 
As usual in statistical methods for disam- 
biguation, there is a trade-off between depth 
of learned information (e. g., number and type 
of features) and non-sparseness of the resulting 
matrix-like structure representing the learning 
results: the deeper the information, the sparser 
the matrix. A good compromise for the prob- 
lem at hand is to regard only the interpretation 
(identified by therule id) and to establish a limit 
nint for the number of interpretations. Empir- 
ical results showed that three is a reasonable 
choice for nint. An example of an entry in the 
interpretation statistics is given in the first line 
of Figure 3 and can be paraphrased as follows: 
The interpretation aus.pars wins in 100% of the 
learned cases if the interpretations aus.origl and 
aus.sourc are possible too. 
If there are more than three possible inter- 
pretations, standard techniques for reducing to 
several triples can be used (backed-off estima- 
tion, see for example (Katz, 1987), (Collins 
and Brooks, 1995)). The relative frequency of 
rule ri being the correct interpretation among 
I = {rl, r2 , . . . ,  rn) is estimated for n > nit as 
in equation (5): 
rf(ri, c) 
(5) i f ( r ,  I)  . -  c c, Ic, I 
where Ci is the set of all subsets of I with 
ni~t elements that contain ri. 
In step 2 of the disambiguation algorithm (see 
middle of Figure 2), the rule that maximizes the 
(estimated) relative frequency must be found for 
each candidate mother. 
3.4 At tachment  d i sambiguat ion  
After step 2, the attachment-interpretation ma- 
trix (aQ,j) contains in each row (attachment) 
one element marked as selected. 9 What remains 
to be done is to choose among all attachments 
with selected interpretation sii one interpreta- 
tion si. 
For this disambiguation task, attachment 
statistics are employed. This time the compro- 
mise between depth of learned information and 
non-sparseness can contain more information 
than just the interpretation id as experiments 
showed. A three-valued syntactic-semantic fea- 
ture cat is added. It describes the candidate 
mother with three possible values: 
v a verb 
nps an NP that describes a situation (at least 
partially), e.g., 'continuation' 
np an NP that does not describe a situation, 
e.g., 'house' 
The second line of Figure 3 contains an example 
that expresses the fact that if the interpretation 
aus.temp for a nominal candidate mother and 
the interpretation aus.cstr for a verbal candi- 
date mother compete then the first is correct 
(in the training corpus) with relative frequency 
1. If one adds even more information to attach- 
ment statistics (e. g., the position of NP candi- 
date mothers like np2 for the second closest NP) 
the attachment data for the annotations in this 
paper becomes too sparse. 
9There might be rows where no element is marked 
because none of the rules fired and passed filtering (see 
section 3.2). 
117 
As for the interpretation statistics in step 2, 
standard techniques can reduce tuples that 
are longer than 2 (hart) to several shorter 
ones. The relative frequency of (ri, cat(cmi)) 
belonging to the correct attachment among 
A = {(rl, cat(cml)), . . . ,  (rn,cat(cmn))} is es- 
timated for n >natt as in equation (6): 
Erf ( (ri, cat(cmi) ), c) 
(6) rf((r,,cat(cm,)),A) := tee, 
where Ci is the set of all subsets of A with 
natt elements that contain (ri, cat(cmi) . 
These relative frequencies for the selected in- 
terpretations sii serve as initial values for an 
attachment score. Other factors can add to this 
score, so that the attachment decision should 
improve; of course, the value is only a score, not 
a relative frequency any more. Different factors 
(e. g., distance between candidate mother and 
the PP; in this way, one can simulate the right- 
association principle, see (Kimball, 1973)) were 
evaluated. The following distance scoring func- 
tion scoredist urned out to be useful: 
(7) d is the number of words between the 
candidate mother and the PP. md is an 
upper limit for distances. Longer 
distances are reduced to md. (10 is a 
reasonable choice for md.) 
scoredist(d) :~- { 
distw.(md--min( d,md) 
md 
for NP mothers 
distw.(rnd--min( d.dist.,md ) ) 
md 
for V mothers 
Good values for the parameters distw (weight 
of the distance factor) and distv (modification 
for verbal mothers) depend on the preposition 
at hand and are learned by testing pairs of val- 
ues from the range 0.0 to 2.0 (see Table 5). 1? 
The last step of the disambiguation algorithm 
is summarized at the bottom of Figure 2. 
4 Eva luat ion  
Cross validation (see section 2.2) showed that 
hybrid disambiguation achieves for both prob- 
1?The best values for these parameters probably also 
depend on text type, text domain, interpretation of the 
PP, etc. 
preposition distw distv 
auf, vor, wegen 0.8 0.6 
aus 1.2 1.0 
bei 1.2 0.8 
fiber 0.8 0.2 
Table 5: Good parameters for the attachment 
scoring function scoredist 
lems, PP attachment and PP interpretation am- 
biguity, satisfying correctness results for all six 
prepositions (see Table 6): 88.6-94.4% for bi- 
nary attachment ambiguities, 85.6-90.8% for 
all ambiguous attachments, and 75.0-84.2% for 
ambiguity degrees above 2 (leading to the mul- 
tiple PP attachment problem). 
Comparison of the interpretation results is 
impossible as these are the first cross-validated 
results for PP interpretation. But 83.3-92.5% 
correctness for prepositions with more than one 
reading seems very promising. 
Comparison of the attachment results is pos- 
sible, but difficult. One reason is that the 
best reported isambiguation results for binary 
PP attachment ambiguities (84.5%, (Collins 
and Brooks, 1995); 88.0% using a seman- 
tic dictionary, (Stetina and Nagao, 1997)) are 
for English. Because word order is freer in 
German than in English, the frequency and 
degree of attachment ambiguity is probably 
higher in German. There are only few evalu- 
ation results for German: (Mehl et al, 1998) 
achieve 73.9% correctness for the preposition 
'mit' ( 'with'/ ' to' / . . . )  using a statistical lexi- 
cal association method. 
Of course, the evaluation corpus is not large 
(720 sentences); so, the results reported in this 
paper must be treated with some caution. But 
as the selected prepositions show diverse num- 
bers of readings (1-9, see Table 4) and the re- 
sults are cross-validated, it is likely that the re- 
ported results will not deteriorate for larger cor- 
pora. 
5 Conc lus ions  
In this paper, a new hybrid disambiguation 
method which uses PP interpretation rules and 
118 
preposition correctness in percentage 
attachment for ambiguity degree 
1 2 3 4 5 _>2 
interpretation att. and int. 
_>3 
auf i00.0 88.6 75.9 i00.0 100.0 85.6 
aus I00.0 90.3 80.0 80.0 - 88.3 
bei i00.0 90.3 82.4 50.0 50.0 86.7 
fiber 100.0 88.8 81.3 100.0 100.0 87.9 
vor 100.0 89.2 75.0 100.0 - 87.0 
wegen 100.0 94.4 70.6 100.0 100.0 90.8 
79.4 92.5 86.7 
80.0 90.8 85.8 
76.2 91.7 85.0 
84.2 83.3 83.3 
77.8 89.2 81.7 
75.0 100.0 91.7 
Table 6: Results of 
statistics about attachment and interpretation 
in an annotated corpus was described. It yields 
results with competitive correctness for both the 
PP attachment problem and the PP interpreta- 
tion problem. 
Some questions had to be left open, e.g., a 
nontrivial reading disambiguation 11 for candi- 
date mothers and sister NPs. Questions con- 
cerning the requisite manual work (maintain- 
ing rules and some parts of annotating corpora) 
arise: How much!does this work pay off and how 
could more of this work be automated? The 
disambiguation method should be evaluated for 
larger corpora (more sentences, more preposi- 
tions) in future research. The ongoing use of 
the disambiguation method in natural anguage 
interfaces will provide valuable feedback. 
Re ferences  
Manfred Bierwisch. 1983. Semantische und 
konzeptuelle Representation lexikalischer 
Einheiten. In ;Rudolf Ru2iSka and Wolfgang 
Motsch, editor, s, Untersuchungen zur Seman- 
tik, Studia grammatica XXII, pages 61-99. 
Akademie-Ver!ag , Berlin. 
Eric Brill and Philip Resnik. 1994. A rule-based 
approach to prepositional phrase attachment 
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 15th 
International .Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 94), pages 1198-1204. 
Paul Buitelaar. !998. CoreLex: Systematic Pol- 
ysemy and Underspecification. PhD disserta- 
tion, Brandeis University. 
l lThis is closely related to the problem of word sense 
disambiguation; currently, this disambiguation is based 
on frequencies. 
hybrid disambiguation 
Michael Collins and James Brooks. 1995. 
Prepositional phrase attachment hrough 
a backed-off model. In Proceedings of 
the 3rd Workshop on Very Large Corpora 
(WVLC-3). 
Alexander Franz. 1996a. Automatic Ambiguity 
Resolution in Natural Language Processing, 
volume 1171 of LNAL Springer, Berlin. 
Alexander Franz. 1996b. Learning PP at- 
tachment from corpus statistics. In Stefan 
Wermter, Ellen Riloff, and Gabriele Scheler, 
editors, Connectionist, Statistical, and Sym- 
bolic Approaches to Learning for Natural Lan- 
guage Processing, volume 1040 of LNAI, 
pages 188-202. Springer, Berlin. 
Sven Hartrumpf and Marion Schulz. 1997. Re- 
ducing lexical redundancy by augmenting 
conceptual knowledge. In Gerhard Brewka, 
Christopher Habel, and Bernhard Nebel, edi- 
tors, Proceedings of the 21st Annual German 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (KI-97), 
number 1303 in Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, pages 393-396, Berlin. Springer. 
Hermann Helbig and Marion Schulz. 1997. 
Knowledge representation with MESNET: 
A multilayered extended semantic network. 
In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Sympo- 
sium on Ontological Engineering, pages 64- 
72, Stanford, California. 
Donald Hindle and Mats Rooth. 1993. Struc- 
tural ambiguity and lexical relations. Com- 
putational Linguistics, 19(1):103-120, March. 
Nancy Ide, Creg Priest-Dorman, and Jean 
V~ronis, 1996. Corpus Encoding Standard. 
http://www.cs.vassar.edu/CES/. 
Slava M. Katz. 1987. Estimation of probabili- 
119 
ties from sparse data for the language model 
component of a speech recognizer. IEEE 
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal 
Processing, ASSP-35(3):400-401, March. 
John Kimball. 1973. Seven principles of surface 
structure parsing in natural anguage. Cogni- 
tion, 2:15-47. 
A. Knoll, C. Altenschmidt, J. Biskup, H.-M. 
Blfithgen, I. G15ckner, S. Hartrumpf, H. Hel- 
big, C. Henning, Y. Karabulut, R. Lfiling, 
B. Monien, T. Noll, and N. Sensen. 1998. An 
integrated approach to semantic evaluation 
and content-based retrieval of multimedia 
documents. In C. Nikolaou and C. Stephani- 
dis, editors, Proceedings of the 2nd European 
Conference on Digital Libraries (ECDL'98), 
volume 1513 of LNCS, pages 409-428, Berlin. 
Springer. 
Stephan Mehl, Hagen Langer, and Martin 
Volk. 1998. Statistische Verfahren zur Zuord- 
nung von Pr~positionalphrasen. In Bernhard 
SchrSder, Winfried Lenders, Wolfgang Hess, 
and Thomas Portele, editors, Proceedings of 
the ~th Conference on Natural Language Pro- 
cessing - KONVENS-98, number 1 in Com- 
puters, Linguistics, and Phonetics between 
Language and Speech, pages 97-110, Frank- 
furt, Germany. Peter Lang. 
Paola Merlo, Matthew W. Crocker, and Cathy 
Berthouzoz. 1997. Attaching multiple prepo- 
sitional phrases: Generalized backed-off es- 
timation. In Proceedings of the 2nd Confer- 
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan- 
guage Processing (EMNLP-2), pages 149- 
155, Providence, Rhode Island. Brown Uni- 
versity. 
Adwait Ratnaparkhi, Jeff Reynar, and Salim 
Roukos. 1994. A maximum entropy model 
for prepositional phrase attachment. In Pro- 
ceedings of the ARPA Human Language Tech- 
nology Workshop, pages 250-255. 
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1998. Statistical mod- 
els for unsupervised prepositional phrase at- 
tachment. In Proceedings of the 17th Inter- 
national Conference on Computational Lin- 
guistics and 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-A CL '98), pages 1079-1085. 
Jiri Stetina and Makoto Nagao. 1997. Corpus- 
based PP attachment ambiguity resolution 
with a semantic dictionary. In Proceedings 
of the 5th Workshop on Very Large Corpora 
(WVLC-5), pages 66-80. 
Ingo Tjaden. 1996. Semantische Pr?positions- 
interpretation im Rahmen der Wortklassen- 
gesteuerten Analyse. Master's thesis, Fern- 
Universit~it Hagen, Hagen. 
Alexander S. Yeh and Marc B. Vilain. 1998. 
Some properties of preposition and subordi- 
nate conjunction attachments. In Proceed- 
ings of the 17th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics and 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics "COLING-A CL'98), pages 1436- 
1442. 
120 
