Exploiting the Student Model to Emphasize Language Teaching 
Pedagogy in Natural Language Processing 
Trude Heift 
Linguistics Department 
Simon Fraser University 
Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A1S6 
heift@sfu.ca 
Paul McFetridge 
Linguistics Department 
Simon Fraser University 
Burnaby, BC, Canada V5AIS6 
mcfet@sfu.ca 
Abstract 
One of the typical problems of Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) is the explosive 
property of the parser and this is aggravated in
an Intelligent Language Tutoring System (ILTS) 
because the grammar is unconstrained and 
admits even more analyses. NLP applications 
frequently incorporate chniques for selecting a
preferred parse. Computational criteria, 
however, are insufficient for a pedagogic system 
because the parse chosen will possibly result in 
misleading feedback for the learner. Preferably, 
the analysis emphasizes language teaching 
pedagogy by selecting the sentence 
interpretation a student most likely intended. In 
the system described in this paper, several 
modules are responsible for selecting the 
appropriate analysis and these are informed by 
the Student Model. Aspects in the Student 
Model play an important pedagogic role in 
determining the desired sentence interpretation, 
handling multiple errors, and deciding on the 
level of interaction with the student. 
Introduction 
One of the fundamental problems of any Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) system is the often 
overwhelming number of interpretations a 
phrase or sentence can be assigned. For 
example, van Noord (1997) states that the Alvey 
Tools Grammar with 780 rules averages about 
100 readings per sentence on sentences ranging 
in length between 13 and 30 words. The problem 
is not always improved with deeper analysis, for 
though a semantic analysis may rule some of the 
possible syntactic structures, it will introduce 
lexical and scope ambiguity. 
The problem of resolving multiple 
interpretations is compounded in an Intelligent 
Language Tutoring System (ILTS) because the 
grammar must not only admit grammatical 
structures, but must also be able to navigate over 
ungrammatical structures and record the errors 
that the student has made. As a consequence, a 
grammar for an ILTS will not only assign 
structures to a grammatical sentence, but may 
also find analyses which interpret the sentence 
as ungrammatical, a set of analyses that a 
traditionally constrained grammar would not 
find. 
The usual method of limiting the number of 
parses that an ILTS grammar assigns is to 
examine the effects of relaxing those constraints 
that represent likely sources of error by students 
and introduce new constraints into the grammar 
rules to block unlikely parses (Schneider & 
McCoy 1998). Such techniques, however, 
overlook individual learner differences as a key 
factor in language teaching pedagogy. 
The system introduced in this paper differs from 
the traditional approach by permitting the 
grammar to freely generate as many parses as it 
can and using separate pedagogic principles to 
select the appropriate interpretation and 
response. The system tightly integrates the 
Student Model into the process of selecting the 
appropriate interpretation and generating a
response tailored to the student's level of 
expertise. The Student Model keeps a record of 
students' performance history which provides 
information essential to the analysis of multiple 
parses, multiple errors, and the level of 
interaction with the student. 
In the German Tutor, the ILTS described, the 
process leading to the creation of an 
instructional message in the event of an error has 
55 
three stages: 
(1) Given a forest of parse trees 
created by the grammar and parser, 
the parse most likely representative 
of the intentions of the student must 
be selected; 
(2) In the cases when the parse 
representing a student's intentions 
contains several errors, one of the 
error must be selected as the one 
that will be addressed. This step is 
necessary because mpirical studies 
have found that reporting all the 
errors in a sentence is pedagogically 
inappropriate. For example, in 
evaluating her own system Schwind 
(1990) reports that "\[s\]ometimes, 
however, the explanations were too 
long, especially when students 
accumulated rrors."~; 
(3) Given an error, an instructional 
message must be constructed that is 
appropriate to the student's level of 
expertise and background. 
In Section 1, the theory behind the grammar and 
its formalism is briefly discussed. Section 2 
describes the process leading to the selection of 
a particular parse and how the Student Model 
participates in this process. We further discuss 
the pedagogic role of the Student Model in 
handling multiple errors and deciding on the 
level of interaction with the student. Section 3 
presents conclusions and Section 4 looks at 
further esearch. 
1 Design of the Grammar 
1.1. Grammatical  Formal ism and 
Implementation 
The grammar for the German Tutor is written in 
ALE (The Attributed Logic  Engine), an 
integrated phrase structure parsing and definite 
clause programming system in which 
grammatical information is expressed as typed 
feature structures (Carpenter & Penn 1994). 
The grammar formalism used is derived from 
l Schwind \[1990a\], p. 577. 
Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar (Pollard 
& Sag 1994). This theory is one of a family 
which share several properties. Linguistic 
information is presented as feature/value 
matrices. Theories in this family are to varying 
degrees lexicalist, that is, a considerable amount 
of grammatical information is located in the 
lexicon rather than in the grammar ules. For 
example, Figure 1 illustrates a minimal lexical 
entry for geht. The subcategorization list of the 
verb, notated with the feature subj, specifies that 
geht takes a subject which is minimally 
specified as a singular noun. Rules of grammar 
specify how words and phrases are combined 
into larger units according to the 
subcategorization list. In addition, other 
principles govern how information such as the 
head features, which inter alia determine the 
grammatical category of a constituent, is 
inherited. 2 
phon < geht > 
head v 
cat subj\[cat\[ ea n\] 
\[content \[~ \[index \[num sg 
Rein geht l 
c?ntent \[Geher \[~ \] 
Figure 1 : Partial Lexical Entry for geht 
Unification-based grammars place an important 
restriction on unification, namely that two 
categories A and B fail to unify if they contain 
mutually inconsistent information (Gazdar & 
Pullum 1985). However, this inconsistent 
information constitutes exactly the errors made 
by second language learners. For example, if the 
two categories A and B do not agree in number 
a parse will fail. To overcome this restriction, 
we relax the constraint on number agreement by 
changing its structure so that, rather than 
checking that the noun is singular, the system 
records whether or not the subject of geht is in 
the singular. To achieve this, the noun is no 
2 Inheritance in feature-value matrices is indicated by 
multiple occurrences of a coindexing box labeling the 
single value. 
56 
longer marked as \[num .sg\], but instead the path 
numlsg terminates with the values error or 
correct. For example, for a singular noun phrase, 
the value of the path numlsg is correct, while it 
is error for a plural noun phrase. The two pa~ial 
lexical entries are given in Figure 2(a) and 
Figure 2(b), respectively. 
content \[index \[num \[sg c?rrect\]\]\]\] 
Figure 2a : Marking Number Features for Singular 
Nouns 
:ontent index num pl correct 
Figure 2b : Marking Number Features for Plural 
Nouns 
The verb geht records the value of s g from its 
subject (Figure 3). If the value of the path 
numlsg is correct, the subject is in the singular. 
In case of a plural noun, geht records the value 
error for number agreement) 
phon < geht > 
head v 
\[cat \[head n\] \]Jl 
cat subj \[ ' \[ 
\[content lindex \[num \[sg \[~\]\] 
descriptor \[main_clause \[vp_num \[sg ~\]\] 
Figure 3 : Recording Number Features for geht 
1.2 Phrase Descriptors 
The goal of the parser and the grammar is the 
generation of phrase descriptors, each of which 
3 For an analysis of errors in linear precedence, s e \[Heift 
98\]. 
describes a particular grammatical constraint, its 
presence or absence in the input sentence and 
the student's performance on this constraint. 
Phrase descriptors correspond to structures in 
the Student Model and are the interface medium 
between the Student Model and other modules 
in the system. 
A phrase descriptor is implemented asa frame 
structure that models a grammatical 
phenomenon. Each member of the frame 
consists of a name followed by a value. For 
example, subject-verb agreement in number is 
modeled by the frame \[number, value\] where 
value represents an as yet uninstantiated value 
for number. If the grammatical phenomenon is 
present in the student's input, the value is either 
correct or error depending on whether the 
grammatical constraint has been met or not, 
respectively. If the grammatical constraint is not 
present in the student's input, the feature value 
is absent. Consider examples (4a) and (b): 
(4a) *Er gehen. 
(4b) Ergeht. 
He is leaving. 
The phrase descriptor for subject-verb 
agreement in number in example (4a) is 
\[number,error\], while that for the sentence in (b) 
is \[number,correct\]. For either sentence, (4a) or 
(b) ,  the information will be recorded in the 
Student Model. A system presented with (4a), 
however, will also instruct he learner on the 
nature of subject-verb agreement i  number. 
In addition to the grammatical features defined 
in HPSG the grammar uses a type descriptor 
representing the description of the phrase that 
the parser builds up. This type is set-valued and 
is initially underspecified in each lexical entry. 
During parsing, the values of the features of 
descriptor are specified. For example, one of the 
members of descriptor, vp num in Figure 3, 
records the number agreement of subject-verb in
a main-clause. Its value is inherited from the .~g 
feature specified in the verb geht. Ultimately, 
descriptor ecords whether the sentence is 
grammatical nd what errors were made. 
57 
2 The Role of the Student Model in 
Analysis and Feedback 
The initial goals of the analysis of the results of 
parsing a student's entence are selecting the 
appropriate parse and, from it, selecting the error 
(if there is one) that the system will focus on for 
instruction. 
A parse of a sentence is a collection of phrase 
descriptors. For example, the phrase descriptor 
given in (5) indicates that the learner has 
violated subject-verb agreement in number in a 
main clause. 
(5) \[main_clause \[vp_num \[sg error\]\]\] 
The constraint that generated this descriptor has 
a correlate in the Student Model, in this case a 
record labelled vp_nummaincl. For each 
grammar constraint, the Student Model keeps a 
counter which, at any given instance in the 
evaluation process, falls in the range of one of 
the three learner levels, given in (6a) - (c). 
(6a) novice: 20 _< X <_ 30 
(b) intermediate: 10 _< X < 20 
(c) expert: 0 _< X < 10 
Initially, the learner is assessed with the value 15 
for each grammar constraint, representing the 
mean score of the intermediate l arner: Once a 
student uses the system, the Student Model 
adjusts the counter of each grammar constraint 
accordingly. If a grammatical constraint has 
been met, the counter is decremented. If the 
constraint has not been met, the counter is 
incremented and, ultimately, a feedback message 
is displayed to the learner. 
The result of the parsing process is a set of 
collections of phrase descriptors, each collection 
representing a separate parse. The step of 
winnowing this set down to a single collection is 
performed by a set of licensing conditions. 
2.1 Selecting the Desired Parse 
A sentence which is unambiguous in many other 
NLP applications can nonetheless result in 
multiple sentence readings in a system designed 
4 The intermediate learner has been chosen as a reasonable 
default. While the messages might be initially too 
overspecified for the expert and too underspecified forthe 
novice, they will quickly adjust to the actual learner level. 
tO parse ill-formed input. For example, consider 
a system which relaxes the constraint on 
grammatical case. Without case marking, the 
parser has no way of knowing if a constituent is
a subject or a verb complement. As a result, 
more than one sentence analysis will be 
produced and the errors flagged in each sentence 
reading can vary. For instance, for the sentence 
Sie liebt er the parser can assign at least two 
legitimate syntactic structures. The two sentence 
readings are given in (7a) and (7b). 
(7a) *Sie liebt er. (7b) Sic liebt er. 
Sie liebt ihn. It is her he loves. 
She loves him. 
For the sentence Sie liebt er, er could be taken to 
be either the direct object or the subject of the 
sentence. Assuming that the choice between the 
two parses were arbitrary, sentence structure 
(7a) where er is the object of the sentence 
contains an error and would yield the feedback 
This is not the correct case for  the direct object. 
In contrast, the alternative sentence reading 
given in (7b) where er is the subject of the 
sentence and the direct object sie is topicalized 
contains no errors. 
The example illustrates two important points. 
First, an algorithm that selects the appropriate 
parse by counting the numbers of errors flagged 
in each parse and selecting that which has the 
least number oferrors \[as in Weischedel (1978), 
Covington & Weinrich (1991)\] is inadequate. If
the student is at an introductory level, the 
appropriate analysis is the sentence reading 
given in (7a), the parse that has more errors. 5
The algorithm promoted here uses instead a set 
of licensing conditions to mark sentences for the 
rules that were used to parse them and select he 
appropriate sentence reading on the basis of the 
likelihood of a grammatical construction. The 
task of the licensing conditions in this example 
is to distinguish multiple sentence readings 
conditioned by word order. During parsing, 
three of the syntactic rules, the Subject-Head, 
the Head-Subject-Complement, and the Head- 
Subject rule each assign a distinct licensing 
descriptor. Any of the three licensing conditions 
5 Object topicalization is a rare construction and not 
explicitly taught at the introductory level where the focus 
is on the grammar of more commonly used rules of 
German. 
58 
can license a sentence. After parsing, the 
Licensing Module prioritizes multiple sentence 
readings so that, in the event of a choice, the 
parses are selected in a particular order. The 
chosen parse is passed on to the next module of 
the system for further processing. 
The second point important to the current 
discussion is that it is not sufficient o exclude 
all other alternatives whenever they appear. An 
advanced student may be practicing object 
topicalization and in that case the system should 
preferably choose the alternative parse given in 
(7b). 
This consideration illustrates the importance of 
the Student Model to the problem of sorting out 
a set of parses to find the intended interpretation. 
To provide input to the licensing conditions, we 
generate a figure representing the student's 
overall mastery of the grammar by averaging 
expertise levels on each grammar constraint in 
the Student Model. A threshold of expertise is 
set, below which the analysis in (7a) is preferred 
and above which that in (7b) is chosen. 
After licensing, a single parsehas been selected 
and a learner model update on each of the 
grammatical constraints present in students' 
input has been extracted. A single parse, 
however, can contain a number of errors and the 
system has to decide on how to communicate 
these errors to the learner. The following section 
will discuss the task of filtering multiple errors 
to select he appropriate one. 
2.2 Filtering Multiple Errors 
A further challenge in analyzing student input is 
presented by multiple errors. The sentence given 
in (8a) illustrates an example. 
(8a) *Heute die Kindern haben gespeilt mit das 
Auto. 
(8b) Heute haben die Kinder mit dem Auto 
gespielt. 
Today the children were playing with the 
car. 
In example (8a) the student made the following 
five errors: 
1. word order: the finite verb haben needs 
to be in second position 
2. word order: the nonfinite verb gespielt 
needs to be in final position 
3. spelling error with the past participle 
gespielt 
? 4. wrong plural inflection for the subject 
Kinder 
5. wrong case for the dative determiner 
dem 
From a pedagogical and also motivational point 
of view, a system should not overwhelm a 
student with instructional feedback referring to 
more than one error at a time. Little research as 
been done in Computer-Assisted Language 
Learning regarding the volume of feedback for 
different kinds of learners at different stages in 
their language development. However, van der 
Linden (1993) found that "feedback, in order to 
be consulted, has to be concise and precise. 
Long feedback (exceeding three lines) is not 
read and for that reason not useful. ''6 She further 
states that displaying more than one feedback 
response at a time makes the correction process 
too complex for the student. The task for an 
Intelligent Language Tutor is to develop an error 
filtering mechanism that incorporates language 
teaching pedagogy. The sheer amount of 
feedback should not overwhelm the student. In 
addition, if feedback messages are displayed one 
at a time they need to be ordered in a 
pedagogically sound way. 
To filter the possible errors, an Error Priority 
Queue is implemented. This queue takes student 
errors and selects the most important error. 
Criteria for selection can be set by the language 
instructor based on her knowledge of the 
difficulty of a grammatical construction, the 
likelihood of an error and/or the focus of the 
exercise. 
However, the Student Model can also be 
invoked to rank errors. One criterion for ranking 
is the students' performance history as indicated 
by the Student Model: the grammar constraint 
most  often violated will be reported first. The 
rationale for this criterion is that this 
grammatical property has been mastered the 
least and therefore needs the most attention. 
After student errors have been ranked and the 
most important one has been selected, the 
system needs to generate instructional feedback 
messages to be displayed to the learner. This is 
6 Van der Linden \[1993\], p. 65. 
59 
achieved by an Analysis Module which will be 
discussed in the following section. 
2.3 Generating Instructional Feedback 
A further difficulty in ILTSs lies in framing 
instructional feedback to student input. In a 
typical student-teacher interaction, feedback 
depends on the students' previous performance 
history. Inexperienced students require detailed 
instruction while experienced students benefit 
best from higher level reminders and 
explanations (LaReau & Vockell 1989). 
For instance, in example (9a) the student made 
an error with the determiner einen of the 
prepositional phrase. Von is a dative preposition 
and Urlaub is a masculine noun. The correct 
article is einem. 
(9a) *Sie tr~iumt von einen Urlaub. 
(9b) Sie tr~iumt von einem Urlaub. 
She is dreaming of a vacation. 
In the German Tutor, the Analysis Module 
generates instructional feedback of different 
levels of specificity. The pedagogical principle 
underlying this design is guided discovery 
learning. According to Elsom-Cook \[1988\], 
guided discovery takes the student along a 
continuum from heavily structured, ~ tutor- 
directed learning to where the tutor plays less 
and less of a role. Applied to feedback, the 
pedagogy scales messages on a continuum from 
least-to-most specific guiding the student 
towards the correct answer. 
For the error in example (9a), the sy, stem 
generates feedback of increasing abstraction that 
the instruction system can use when interacting 
with the student. The level of  the learner, either 
expert, intermediate, or novice according to the 
current state of the Student Model, determines 
the particular feedback displayed. The 
responses, given in (10a) - (c) correspond to the 
three learner levels for the error in example (9a), 
respectively: 
(10a) There is a mistake with the article 
einen of the prepositional phrase. 
(10b) There is a mistake in case with the 
article einen of the prepositional phrase. 
(10c) This is not the correct case for the 
article einen of the prepositional phrase. Von 
assigns the dative case, 
For the expert, the feedback is most general, 
providing a hint to where in the sentence the 
error occurred (prepositional phrase). For the 
intermediate learner, the feedback is more 
detailed, providing additional information on the 
type of error (case). For the beginner, the 
feedback is the most precise. It not only 
pinpoints the location and type of the error but 
also refers to the exact source of the error 
(dative preposition). 
The Analysis Module is implemented in DATR 
\[Evans and Gazdar 1990\], a language designed 
for pattern-matching and representing multiple 
inheritance. For each grammar constraint, the 
Analysis Module creates three categories of 
instructional feedback corresponding to the three 
learning levels. Provided with three categories 
of feedback, the system selects an error response 
suited to students' expertise. The student level is 
determined by the numerical value for each 
grammatical constraint maintained in the 
Student Model. Each value is adjusted each time 
the learner interacts with the system. 
For example, the grammar constraint pp-dat 
records the student's performance on dative 
assigning prepositions. A learner who violates 
the constraint on dative prepositions will, at 
first, obtain the feedback message for the 
intermediate. If the student commits the same 
error in subsequent exercises, s/he will soon be 
assessed a novice. At this point, the system will 
display the more detailed feedback message 
suited to the beginner. However, each time the 
student applies the grammatical constraint 
correctly, the Student Model records the 
success. After demonstrating proficiency, the 
student will again be assessed as intermediate, 
or, even expert. Maintaining a large number of 
grammatical constraints allows for a very 
detailed portrait of an individual student's 
language competence over a wide-range of 
grammatical phenomena. 
After instructional feedback for student input 
has been generated; the feedback message is 
passed to the Teaching Module. The Teaching 
Module interacts with the learner. It displays 
instructional feedback and, at the end of an 
exercise set, shows the student's performance 
history on each grammatical constraint. Students 
performance history informs learners and 
instructors of the grammatical construction the 
60 
student has mastered as well as the ones that 
require remedial work. 
Conclusion 
In this paper, we have described a Student 
Model that implements language teaching 
pedagogy in guiding the analysis of student 
input in an ILTS for German. The Student 
Model keeps a record of students' previous 
performance history which provides information 
essential to the analysis of multiple parses, 
multiple errors, and the level of interaction with 
the student. 
For multiple parses, the system implements 
licensing conditions which select one of the 
possible parses by taking into account the 
likelihood of the error. The likelihood of an error 
is determined by the performance level of the 
student as indicated by the Student Model. For 
multiple errors, the system implements an Error 
Priority Queue which takes student errors and 
selects the most important error. Criteria for 
selection can be set by the instructor or evoked 
by the Student Model. The Student Model ranks 
errors with respect to students' performance 
history. Finally, by consult ing the Student 
Model, the Analysis Module selects instructional 
feedback of different levels of specificity. 
From a language teaching perspective, the 
system reflects a pedagogically informed, 
student-centered approach. System decisions are 
based on a dynamic Student Model rather than 
static computational factors. As a consequence, 
the learning process is individualized throughout 
the analysis of student input. 
Further Research 
The ILTS described in this paper has been 
implemented on the World Wide Web. While 
the system encompasses all the necessary 
grammar ules, we are currently expanding the 
lexicon for an introductory course of German. 
Our immediate goal is to test the system with 
learners of German to assess accuracy. Long- 
term goals include expanding the Student 
Model. Student performance is only one 
criterion to individualize the language learning 
process. The native language of the student as 
well as different learning styles might also be 
key factors in the analysis of student input. 
References 
Carpenter, B., and Penn, Gerald. (1994) The Attribute 
Logic Engine: User's Guide, Version 2.0. 
Computational Linguistics Program, Carnegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburgh. 
Covington, M.A., and Weinrich, K.B. (1991) 
"Unification-Based Diagnosis of Language 
Learners' Syntax Errors." Literary and Linguistic 
Computing, 6(3): 149-154. 
Elsom-Cook, M. (1988) "Guided Discovery Tutoring 
and Bounded User Modelling." Artificial 
Intelligence and Human Learning. Self, J., ed. 
Bristol: J. W. Arrowsmith Ltd.: 165-178. 
Evans, R., and Gazdar, G. (1990). The DATR Papers, 
Volume L Brighton, School of Cognitive and 
Computing Sciences. The University of Sussex. 
Gazdar, G., and Pullum, G. (1985) "Computationally 
Relevant Properties of Natural Languages and their 
Grammars." New Generation Computing. 3: 273- 
306. 
Heift, T. (1998) Designed Intelligence: A Language 
Teacher Model. Doctoral Dissertation, Simon 
Fraser University. 
LaReau, P., and Vockell, E. (1989) The Computer in 
the Foreign Language Curriculum. Santa Cruz, 
CA: Mitchell Publishing. 
Pollard, C., and Sag, I. (1994) Head-Driven Phrase 
Structure Grammar. Chicago University Press. 
Schneider, D., and McCoy K. (1998) "Recognizing 
Syntactic Errors in the Writing of Second 
Language Learners." Proceedings of the 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics. 
Schwind, C. B. (1990) "An Intelligent Language 
Tutoring System." International Journal of Man- 
Machine Studies, 33: 557-579. 
Van der Linden, E. (1993) "Does Feedback Enhance 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning. " 
Computers & Education, 21 (1-2): 61-65. 
Van Noord, G. (1997) "An Efficient Implementation 
of the Head-Corner Parser." Computational 
Linguistics, 23 (3): 425-456. 
Weischedel, R.M., Voge, W.M., and James, M. 
(1978) "An Artificial Intelligence Approach to 
Language Instruction." Artificial Intelligence, 10: 
225-240. 
61 
