Multimedia Computer Technology and Performance-Based 
Language Testing: A Demonstration of the Computerized Oral 
Proficiency Instrument (COPI) 
Valerie A. MALABONGA 
Center for Applied Linguistics 
4646 40 ~ Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20016 
valene@cal.org 
Dorry M. KENYON 
Center for Applied Linguistics 
4646 40 .h Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20016 
dorry@cal.org 
Abstract 
The field of language testing has long led 
the way in integrative, performance-based 
assessment. However, the use of technology 
in language testing has often meant limiting 
assessment options. We believe computer- 
mediated language assessment can enrich 
opportunities for language learners to 
demonstrate what they are able to do with 
their second language. In this paper, we 
describe the rationale and operation of the 
Computerized Oral Proficiency Instrument 
(COPI), a multimedia, computer- 
administered oral proficiency test. While at 
present speech performances on the COPI 
are evaluated by trained raters using a 
national standard, the COPI affords an 
excellent opportunity to investigate the use 
of Natural Language Processing for 
computer-assisted evaluation. 
Introduction 
The Computerized Oral Proficiency Instrument 
(COPI) is a multi-media, computer-administered 
adaptation of the tape-mediated Simulated Oral 
Proficiency Interview (SOPI). Both the SOPI 
and the COPI are oral proficiency tests based on 
the Speaking Proficiency Guidelines of the 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages (ACTFL). Oral proficiency tests like 
the SOPI and COPI use simulated real life tasks 
to elicit speech ratable by the ACTFL Guidelines' 
criteria. The purpose of the COPI is to use the 
advantages of multi-media computer technology 
to improve the SOPI by giving examinees more 
control over various aspects of the testing 
situation and increasing raters' efficiency in 
scoring the test. 
In this paper we primarily discuss the Spanish 
version of the COPI, although an Arabic and a 
Chinese version are also being prepared. This 
paper provides the context for the COPI, 
discusses its rationale, its components and its 
phases, and introduces the scoring program used 
by raters who assess an examinee's peech 
performances using the criteria of the ACTFL 
Guidelines. 
1. Computer Technology in Performance- 
Based Assessments of Speaking Ability 
Technology has no doubt been a part of 
language testing since 'before the invention of 
the pencil. Electronic technology, through the 
phonograph record, reel-to-reel and later casette 
tape, and the compact disc, has enhanced the 
assessment of listening skills for decades. 
Computers allowed for the development of 
computer-adaptive and computer-administered 
tests in second languages. Since June of 1998, 
the Educational Testing Service (ETS) has 
administered the Test of English as a Foreign 
Language (TOEFL) by computer in many parts 
of the world. With almost one million test takers 
a year, the TOEFL is the world's largest 
language test. The use of computer technology 
has allowed ETS to introduce a new variety of 
selected-response type items not easily presented 
in paper and pencil format. In addition, the 
computer-based TOEFL allows examinees the 
option of word-processing a written essay, as 
opposed to writing it longhand. Of all sections 
of the current TOEFL, only the essay can be 
16 
regarded as performance-based, since examinees 
provide a demonstration of their linguistic 
abilities through producing a text. 
While some have argued that multiple-choice 
tests of listening comprehension can provide a 
proxy measure of speaking ability, speaking 
skills have traditionally been assessed through 
some type of performance-based assessment, 
typically a live face-to-face oral interview 
procedure. The best known formal procedure is
the Oral Proficiency Interview (OPI). The OPI is 
used by various government agencies involved 
with language training, including the Foreign 
Service Institute, where it was originally 
developed in the 1950s to assess the readiness of 
US personnel for functioning in oversees 
diplomatic posts. In US academia, the American 
Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages 
(ACTFL) has promulgated the OPI since the 
early 1980s through professional development 
workshops and tester training programs 
(Stansfield, 1996). 
In the mid-1980s, the Center for Applied 
Linguistics (CAL) began a program of research 
and development in using technology to elicit 
speech samples from examinees that can be 
assessed following the same criteria used in the 
ACTFL OPI. The impetus for this program was 
the need to assess peaking skills of students of 
less-commonly-taught-languages in instructional 
programs throughout the nation where there was 
no trained OPI interviewer. Performances 
elicited by and recorded on tape could then be 
sent to trained OPI testers for evaluation. The 
format developed by CAL came to be known as 
the Simulated Oral Proficiency Interview 
(SOPI). High correlations (averaging .92) were 
found between performances on the SOPI and 
the OPI across a variety of languages (Stansfield 
and Kenyon, 1992). The testing format was also 
found to be useful in large-scale testing 
applications where it was necessary to ensure 
that all examinees received the same high 
quality test, and the SOPI format has been used 
in or adapted for a variety of language testing 
projects. Other variations of the SOPI appeared, 
most notably the Video Oral Communication 
Instrument (VOCI), developed by the Language 
Acquisition Resource Center at San Diego State 
University. The VOCI uses a video rather than 
an audio tape and test booklet o elicit examinee 
speech performances. 
Based on its work with the SOPI, CAL is 
currently developing a format for a computer- 
administered assessment of oral proficiency 
known as the Computerized Oral Proficiency 
Instrument (COPI). 
2. Importance of National Proficiency 
Standards 
Tape-mediated speaking tests existed prior to the 
development of the SOPI. One example is the 
original version of the Test of Spoken English 
(TSE), developed by ETS and used to assess the 
oral language skills (particularly 
comprehensibility) of foreign teaching 
assistants. There are now many tape-mediated 
speaking tests or portions of larger tests that 
assess peaking skills through the use of a tape. 
Tests including tape-mediated speaking portions 
include the Advanced Placement Exams in 
modern languages and the PRAXIS examination 
used by states to certify language teachers. The 
main difference between these tests and the 
SOPI and now the COPI, however, is that such 
tests are assessed using criteria developed 
specifically for the exam, whereas the SOPI is 
assessed using the A CTFL Speaking Proficiency 
Guidelines (American Council on the Teaching 
of Foreign Languages, 1986, 1999), which exist 
outside the context of the assessment. 
The ACTFL Guidelines tand in a tradition of 
oral proficiency testing in the United States that 
dates to the 1950s, when the then Secretary of 
State called for the creation of criteria that could 
be used to identify the foreign language 
proficiency of U.S. government employees 
(Stansfield, 1996). The result was a 0-5 scale, 
ranging from "no knowledge" to "total mastery," 
with a brief definition of proficiency associated 
with each point on the scale. Since their original 
creation, the definitions have undergone a 
number of revisions, but are still in use and 
known today as the lnteragency Language 
Roundtable (ILR) Skill Level Descriptions. 
In the early 1980s, the government's definitions 
were adapted and disseminated by ACTFL for 
17 
use in the nation's secondary schools and 
colleges. These definitions have come to be 
known as the ACTFL Guidelines. First published 
in a provisional version in 1982, they were 
revised and published for large-scale use in 1986 
(American Council on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages, 1986). While the Guidelines cover 
all four language skills, the Speaking Proficiency 
Guidelines have been recently revised and re- 
published in 1999 (American Council on the 
Teaching of Foreign Languages, 1999). 
The ACTFL Guidelines define proficiency as 
"the ability to use the language ffectively and 
appropriately in real-life situations" (Buck, 
Byrnes, and Thompson, 1989, 1.1). The 
Guidelines posit four levels of proficiency: 
Novice, Intermediate, Advanced and Superior. 
The first three levels are further broken into 
three sublevels: Low, Mid, and High. Thus, the 
Guidelines define 10 levels of proficiency: 
Novice Low, Novice Mid, Novice High, 
Intermediate Low, Intermediate Mid, 
Intermediate High, Advanced Low, Advanced 
Mid, Advanced High, and Superior. 
The Guidelines define proficiency in terms of 
the global tasks or functions the speaker can 
handle, the contexts in which he or she can 
effectively communicate, the content about 
which the speaker can communicate, and the 
accuracy with which he or she communicates. 
Accuracy is typically considered in terms of how 
well the speaker is understood by his or her 
interlocutors. 
Thus, unlike other technology-based speaking 
tests, the overriding oal of the SOPI and the 
COPI is to use technology to provide a valid 
surrogate assessment to the face-to-face OPI. In 
other words, the performance must be ratable 
using the criteria of the ACTFL Guidelines and 
an examinee should be assessed at the same 
ACTFL proficiency level using any technique. 
Because the ACTFL Guidelines have had a 
major national impact and are so widely used in 
the US in both academia nd government, we 
feel that this is the best way for our current 
project o have the greatest national impact. 
3. A Collaboration between Examinee and 
Computer in the Production of the 
Ratable Speech Sample 
The goal of general oral proficiency tests such as 
the OPI, SOPI, VOCI, or COPI is to allow 
examinees to demonstrate to a trained rater 
features of oral language proficiency at one of 
the main global proficiency levels they 
consistently control. In other words, examinees 
demonstrate what they can do with the language 
regardless of how they learned it. In order to 
make appropriate assessments, he test must give 
the rater evidence that examinees assessed at a 
particular level do not control the features of the 
next higher level of proficiency. 
In the OPI, examinees have a certain amount of 
input into the procedure. The interviewer adapts 
the level of difficulty of the questions to the 
proficiency level displayed by the examinee. 
Examinees control the length of their responses 
to the interviewer's questions. They have some 
control over the content of the interview in that 
the interviewer is trained (particularly at lower 
levels) to follow up on topics nominated by the 
examinee. 
In tape-mediated tests, much of this control is 
lost. In general, timed pauses prescribe for the 
examinee how much time he or she has to think 
about and give a response. All examinees must 
perform all tasks presented to them on the tape; 
there is no selection of the tasks. 
The main goal of the COPI is to use computer 
technology to allow the examinee and computer 
to work together to produce a speech sample 
ratable using the ACTFL criteria. The program 
must enable the examinee to show what he or 
she can do in a second language. Thus, the COPI 
allows examinee control over several aspects of 
the test administration. This is made possible by 
the large amount of electronic data that can be 
stored in computers and by the random-access 
nature of data retrieval. Underlying the COPI is 
a large pool of assessment tasks that cover a 
wide variety of content areas and topics. The 
COPI allows examinees to have control of the 
time they take to prepare for and respond to a 
task. While a maximum time limit needs to be 
enforced to make sure the testing process 
18 
continues, that limit is long enough to allow for 
most examinees toexperience ontrol. 
The COPI allows examinees some choice in the 
difficulty level of the tasks presented tothem. In 
order to ensure that examinees are pushed to 
show the full extent of their ability, the difficulty 
level of all tasks cannot be examinee-selected. 
Raters need to hear examinees attempt asks 
higher than their proficiency level to ascertain 
their consistent level of performance. By 
keeping track of the examinee's choices, a 
program can ensure that this occurs. Limited 
examinee selection may, however, assure that 
the tasks administered are as appropriate as 
possible to each examinee's level of ability. 
4. Description of the Test Administration 
Program for the Spanish COPI 
4.1 Technical Requirements 
The COPI program works well with a Windows 
95 operating system, or higher, with a Pentium 
processor and 64 MB of RAM. The examinees' 
responses can be recorded on internal or external 
zip drives, or the hard drive. We do not 
recommend the use of Windows NT or laptop 
computers because the small memory space in 
these types of computers makes recording 
responses difficult. 
4.2 Assessment Tasks 
At the core of the COPI is a pool of about 100 
assessment tasks. These tasks are based on tasks 
successfully used in SOPIs. Each task has a 
targeted ACTFL level (Novice, Intermediate, 
Advanced, or Superior) and is coded for its 
speaking function and content/topic area. Each 
task is a separate master computer file composed 
of a single-sentence d scription of the task, 
written and audio directions in English, written 
and audio directions in Spanish (for tasks at the 
Advanced and Superior levels), a graphic file of 
a picture that accompanies the task (for those 
tasks that have pictures) and an audio prompt 
from a native Spanish-speaker. Depending on 
the choices that the examinee makes, the test 
takes anywhere from 30-50 minutes. 
The COPI uses an algorithm which allows 
examinees (within some limits) to choose the 
following aspects of the test: amount of 
preparation and response time, speaking 
function, topic, level of difficulty (i.e., ACTFL 
level of task), and language of the directions 
(English or Spanish for Advanced and Superior 
level tasks) for each performance task. 
Figure 1 shows the screen for the sample task at 
level B (ACTFL Intermediate). 
19 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  I I  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  I 
Sample. Task, at Level B 
~:~ : :~  
? :.  :~:i.~ :./ 
, L " " ,. . i Click '!I'm :Ready to begn 
Click "l!m Finished" to:stop. 
I Beach Description 
i i i i i  I 
Imagine:that:you are visiting friends ;in Ecuador. 
Your:ffiendS: are talking ab:out going tO the 
beach, One,of:your friends, Pablo,~ asks~ you to 
desCi~ibe;the;kinds:of activities people usually do 
at the beach in:theU.S. Use your own 
experience or the picture: provided as a source 
of ideas: A~er Pablo :askshis qu!estion, 
describe the kindsofactivities people 
usually do ~ at,the beach; 
,I oo,oo,Ol 
Figure 1 
4.3 How Examinee Choice is 
Operationalized 
4.3.1 Time 
The COPI provides time for examinees to think 
about their response and time to give their 
response. The total amount given for each task is 
shown by balls in a timer at the bottom right 
hand of the screen. Each ball represents 15 
seconds. More preparation and response time is 
allotted for higher-level than for lower-lower 
level tasks, but examinees still have the choice 
to use all the time allotted or to click on a button 
when they are ready to speak, or when they have 
finished speaking. Plenty of time is allotted and 
in our pilot testing to date, no examinee has 
indicated feeling pressured by the time factor. 
4.3.2 Speaking Functions and Topics 
In total, an examinee generally responds to 
seven tasks on the COPI. Examinees are always 
given a choice of three tasks, from which they 
choose one. At the Intermediate level, for 
example, they may choose from the following 
task descriptions: "Ask a Spanish exchange 
student some questions about her family," 
"Describe your leisure time activities to a 
visiting Bolivian student." Or "Tell a student 
from the Dominican Republic about your plans 
for the weekend." An algorithm in the program 
ensures that examinees perform each speaking 
function (e.g., narrating in the past) and talk 
about each content area/topic (e.g., food) only 
once during the collaborative development of 
the speech sample. Examinees are thus exposed 
to a variety of tasks and can select tasks and 
topics they feel most comfortable with. 
20 
4.3.3 ACTFL Level of the COPI Task 
The ACTFL level of the first COPI task 
administered is determined by the examinees' 
self-assessment scores and the level of the 
sample tasks practiced (described more 
completely in 4.4.3). Following the first task, 
examinees are given the choice to select asks at 
the same level of challenge, a less challenging 
task, or a more challenging task, after every 
other task. An algorithm in the program ensures 
that examinees are offered tasks at a level higher 
than the one they have generally chosen, to 
allow the rater to evaluate whether or not they 
can fulfill the criteria for performance atthe next 
higher level. 
4.3.4 Language of Directions 
At present, examinees are given the choice to 
read and hear the directions to the performance 
task in Spanish or English only for the two 
highest levels of tasks. Lower level examinees 
receive all directions only in English. Following 
piloting testing of the Spanish COPI, however, 
we will experiment with including both English 
and Spanish directions for lower-level speakers. 
This is to provide more target language support 
for the lower-level speakers. 
Results from the pilot test of the COPI showed 
that the examinees felt more comfortable and 
less anxious because they were given choices 
that made the test more flexible. This, we feel, is 
an improvement from the SOPI, where such 
choices were unavailable. 
4.4 Phases of the COPI 
When taking the COPI, the examinee goes 
through the following nine phases: welcome, 
information on the purpose and structure of the 
COPI; input and correction of personal 
information; self-assessment of proficiency 
level; listening to an adequate response to (a) 
sample task(s); practice with the same sample 
task(s); responding to performance tasks (the 
actual test); feedback about the levels of the 
tasks that the examinee took, and closing. A 
photograph of a friendly, female "guide" 
accompanies the screens. The guide' s
photograph is present in all the screens that 
welcome, give instructions, and close the 
program. Notes on these phases follow. 
4.4.1 Welcome~Information on the Purpose 
and Structure of the COPI 
The purpose of these two phases is to introduce 
examinees to the COPI and help them feel at 
ease. 
4.4.2 Input and Correction of Personal 
Information 
Examinees enter their personal data and are 
given an opportunity to correct any wrong 
information. The information is used to identify 
the examinees and to allow the program to select 
tasks appropriate to the examinees' profiles. For 
instance, in Arabic culture (for the Arabic 
COPI), it is inappropriate for unmarried persons 
of the opposite sex to do certain activities 
together (e.g., share an apartment). Therefore, an 
algorithm in the Arabic COPI ensures that a 
female or male version of these tasks is 
presented to the examinee depending on whether 
the examinee is identified as a female or male, 
respectively. 
4.4.3 Self-Assessment of One's Proficiency 
Level 
Examinees answer 18 questions about their 
abilities to communicate in the test language; for 
example, give directions, ask questions, 
hypothesize, and so on. Kenyon (1996) showed 
that the correlation between examinees' answers 
to these 18 self-assessment questions and their 
actual ACTFL assessments was .78. The COPI 
program uses examinees' score on the self- 
assessment to determine at which level they 
receive the first sample task. 
4.4.4 Listening to and Practice on Sample 
Tasks 
Examinees are given an opportunity to listen to 
an adequate response to a sample task. They are 
then asked to respond to the same sample task 
for practice. This is the point in the program at 
which the directions for navigating the tasks are 
explained. After giving their performance on the 
sample task, examinees are asked if they want to 
practice with a more challenging or a less 
challenging task before going on to the actual 
test. 
4.4.5 Responding toPerformance Tasks 
Examinees can select the level of their first 
performance task based on their self-assessment 
results and experience with the sample task(s). 
21 
The program algorithm is set to ensure that 
examinees respond to a minimum of four tasks 
at the level of the first task selected and three at 
the next higher level (or next lower level if their 
self-assessment level is already at Superior) for a 
minimum of seven tasks. Depending on the 
choices examinees make, however, they can be 
administered a maximum of 11 tasks, though 
this is very rare. 
4.4.6 Feedback on the Levels of the Tasks that 
Examinees Took~Closing 
After completing the last performance task, 
examinees receive feedback about the levels of 
tasks they have taken and are thanked for their 
participation. 
5. Description of the Current Scoring 
Program 
As with the SOPI, performances on the COPI 
are assessed following the criteria of the ACTFL 
Speaking Proficiency Guidelines. The scoring 
program allows raters to hear the examinees' 
responses for each task and to listen to the 
examinees' tasks in any order. As raters assess 
each task, elements of the task, such as its 
ACTFL level, the picture accompanying the 
task, the directions and the Spanish prompt 
appear on the screen. These elements give raters 
background information about each task and 
facilitate the assessment of the performances. 
Raters can also rewind each examinee's 
response for a particular task and they can 
likewise go back to previously rated tasks. 
The program also allows raters to write notes to 
examinees so that, aside from providing a global 
rating (i.e., the ACTFL proficiency level at 
which the examinee demonstrated consistent 
performance), raters are also able to give overall 
comments and task-specific feedback to each 
examinee. In addition, the COPI allows raters to 
listen to performances on only those tasks that 
are necessary to give an accurate assessment of
the examinees' ACTFL proficiency level, 
thereby increasing raters' efficiency. For 
example, if an examinee responded to four 
Superior tasks and three Advanced tasks, we 
suggest that the rater start assessing the highest 
level (Superior) tasks first. If the examinee is 
clearly a Superior speaker based on his or her 
performance on the four Superior-level tasks, 
then it is not necessary for the rater to listen to 
his or her performances on the three Advanced- 
level tasks. 
6. Opportunities for Interfacing with 
Natural Language Processing 
Performances on the current version of the COPI 
are assessed by trained human raters. While the 
COPI scoring program is designed to improve 
efficiency in rating, assessing speech 
performances elicited by the COPI using the 
criteria of the ACTFL Guidelines remains a 
labor-intensive ffort. The COPI harnesses 
technology to provide examinees an opportunity 
to demonstrate their oral proficiency without he 
labor intensity involved on the part of a test 
administrator (as compared to the individually 
administered face-to-face OPI). In a similar 
manner, we feel that this program provides 
opportunities for interfacing with natural 
language processing to provide technological 
assistance in assessing examinee speech 
performances. While that discussion is outside 
the scope of this paper, we feel implementation 
of oral proficiency assessment, particularly for 
lower-level learners, would increase were it 
possible for technology to assist in the 
evaluation of speech performances. An increase 
in the practicability of large-scale 
technologically mediated oral assessments has 
the potential for a great washback effect in our 
nation's classrooms to promote the development 
of oral proficiency in second languages. 
Educational practitioners have long understood 
that ultimately what gets assessed is what gets 
taught and practiced. 
Conclusion 
We believe the COPI offers significant 
improvements in terms of administration of 
technologically mediated oral proficiency 
assessments over tape- or video-mediated 
assessments. Pilot testing to date indicates that 
examinees are comfortable with the 
administration format and understand what is 
required of them. A validation study is planned 
for the near future to compare performances on 
the COPI with those on the SOPI and OPI. Other 
refinements suggested by the piloting testing are 
being incorporated into the Arabic and Chinese 
versions. If such improvements are found to be 
22 
helpful through pilot testing, they will be 
brought into the Spanish version. 
Acknowledgments 
Support for the development of the COPI is 
provided by grant P017A70019-98, International 
Research and Studies Program, International 
Education and Graduate Program Service, U.S. 
Department ofEducation. The work presented in
this paper builds on continuing research and 
development projects in technologically- 
mediated oral proficiency testing over the past 
15 years at the Center for Applied Linguistics. It 
is !mpossible to properly acknowledge all who 
have contributed irectly or indirectly to the 
current efforts. However, we do acknowledge 
our colleagues at CAL contributing to the COPI 
project, including Weiping Wu, Kate Jerris, Jane 
Herlihy, Deanne Marein-Efron, Helen 
Carpenter, David MacGregor, Charles 
Stansfield, and Suzy Meyer, COPI programmer. 
References 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages. (1986) Proficiency guidelines. 
Hastings-on-Hudson, NY: Author. 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages. (1999) ACTFL proficiency 
guidelines--speaking: Revised 1999. 
Hastings-on-Hudson, NY: Author. 
Buck, K., Byrnes, H. and Thompson, I. (Eds.) (1989) 
The ACTFL oral proficiency interview tester 
training manual. Yonkers, NY: ACTFL. 
Kenyon D. M. (1996, November) Self-assessment 
and speaking tasks: Research and application. 
Workshop, Annual Meeting of the American 
Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 
Philadelphia, PA. 
Stansfield, C. W. (1996) Test development handbook: 
Simulated oral proficiency interview. Washington, 
DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. 
Stansfield, C. W. and Kenyon, D. M. (1992) 
Research on the comparability of the Oral 
Proficiency Interview and the Simulated Oral 
Proficiency Interview. System, 20, 347-64. 
23 
