Why Doesn't Natural Language Come Naturally? 
Richard  Schwar tz  
BBN Techno log ies  
Cambr idge ,  MA 02138 
schwar tz@bbn.com 
Abst ract  
We have seen great success over the past 15 years 
in speech recognition. This success is due, largely, 
to the broad acceptance of Hidden Markov Models 
(HMMs) at the beginning of that period, which then 
facilitated rapid and steady improvements in speech 
recognition that are still continuing today. Although 
no one believes peech is produced by an HMM, the 
model affords a rich framework in which to improve 
the model in a rigorous and scientific manner. 
Could we create the same environment for a uni- 
form probabilistic paradigm in NL? It requires ev- 
eral ingredients: 
? A uniform notational system to express mean- 
ings, 
? A statistical model that can represent the asso- 
ciations between meanings and words, 
* A training program that estimates parameters 
from annotated examples, 
? An understanding program that finds the most 
likely meaning iven a word sequence, and 
? A substantial corpus with meanings annotated 
and aligned to the words. 
These problems are fundamental. In speech recog- 
nition, we can all agree that the desired output is 
a sequence of orthographic words. But in under- 
standing, we lack agreement as to the meaning of 
meaning. And it gets harder from there, since the 
structures we must look at are not sequences, but 
rather trees or more complex structures. Still the 
goal is a worthwhile one. 
We attempt to formulate several different lan- 
guage understanding problems as probabilistic pat- 
tern recognition problems. In general, our goal is to 
rely heavily on corpus based methods and learning 
techniques rather than on human generated rules. 
At the same time, it is essential that we be able to 
incorporate our intuitions about the problem into 
the model. We choose probabilistic methods as our 
preferred form of learning technique because they 
have several desirable properties. First, if we can 
accurately estimate the posterior probability of our 
desired result, then we know a decision based on this 
posterior probability will minimize the error rate. 
Second, we have a large inventory of techniques for 
estimation of robust probabilities from finite data. 
Third, in contrast o classical pattern recognition 
problems, language deals almost exclusively with se- 
quences (of sounds, phonemes, charaCters, words, 
sentences, etc.) Our goal is not to recognize or un- 
derstand each of these independently, but rather to 
understand the sequence. Probability theory pro- 
vides a convenient way to combine several pieces of 
evidence in making a decision. 
We present several anguage problems for which 
we have developed probabilistic methods that 
achieve accuracy comparable to that of the best 
rule-based systems. In each case we developed a
model that is (somewhat) appropriate for the prob- 
lem. These problems include Topic Classification, 
Information Retrieval, Extracting Named Entities, 
and Extracting Relations. 
128 
