What's Happened Since the First SIGDAT 
Kenneth  Ward  Church  
AT&T Labs-Research 
180 Park Ave 
F lorham Park, NJ 07932-0971 
kwc@research.att .com 
Meeting? 
Abst rac t  
The first workshop on Very Large Corpora was held 
just before the 1993 ACL meeting in Columbus, 
Ohio. The turnout was even greater than anyone 
could have predicted (or else we would have called 
the meeting a conference rather than a workshop). 
We knew that corpus-based language processing was 
a "hot area," but we didn't appreciate just how hot 
it would turn out to be. 
The 1990s were: witnessing a resurgence ofinterest 
in 1950s-style mpirical and statistical methods of 
language analysis, Empiricism was at its peak in the 
1950s, dominating a broad set of fields ranging from 
psychology (behaviorism) to electrical engineering 
(information theory). At that time, it was common 
practice in linguistics to classify words not only on 
the basis of their meanings but also on the basis 
of their co-occurrence with other words. Firth, a 
leading figure in British linguistics during the 1950s, 
summarized the approach with the memorable ine: 
"You shall know a word by the company it keeps." 
Regrettably, interest in empiricism faded in the late 
1950s and early 1960s with a number of significant 
events including Chomsky's criticism of n-grams in 
Syntactic Structures (Chomsky, 1957) and Minsky 
and Papert's criticism of neural networks in Pereep- 
trons (Minsky and Papert, 1969). 
Perhaps the most immediate r ason for this empir- 
ical renaissance is the availability of massive quanti- 
ties of data: text is available like never before. Just 
ten years earlier, the one-million word Brown Corpus 
(Francis and Kucera, 1982) was considered large, but 
these days, everyone has access to the web. Exper- 
iments are routinely carried out on many gigabytes 
of text. Some researchers are even working with ter- 
abytes. 
The big difference since the first SIGDAT meeting 
in 1993 is that large corpora re now having a big im- 
pact on ordinary users. Web search engines/portals 
are an obvious example. Managing igabytes i not 
only the title of a popular book that recently came 
out with a second edition (Moffat, Bell and Witten, 
1999), but it is something that ordinary users are be- 
ginning to take for granted. Recent progress in Infor- 
mation Retrieval and Digital Libraries is worth a for- 
tune (according to the stockmarket). Speech Recog- 
nition and Machine Translation are also changing 
the world. If you walk into any software store these 
days, you will find a shelf full of speech recognition 
and machine translation products. And it is getting 
so you can't use the telephone these days without 
talking to a computer. 
Re ferences  
Chomsky, N. 1957. Syntactic Structures, The Hague: 
Mouton & Co. 
Firth, J. 1957. A Synopsis of Linguistic Theory 1930- 
1955. In Studies in Linguistic Analysis, Philologi- 
cal Society, Oxford; reprinted in Palmer, F. (ed.), 
1968, Selected Papers of J. R. Firth, Longman, 
Harlow. 
Francis, W., and Kucera, H. 1982. Frequency Analy- 
sis of English Usage, Houghton Mifflin Company, 
Boston. 
Minsky, M. and Papert, S. 1969. Perceptrons; An 
Introduction to Computational Geometry, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Moffat, A, Bell, T., and Witten, I. 1999. Managing 
Gigabytes: Compressing and Indexing Documents 
and Images, Academic Press/Morgan Kaufmann. 
