TIPSTER PROGRAM HISTORY 
Thomas H. Crystal 
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
3701 N. Faiffax Drive 
Arlington, VA 22203 
crystal@arpa.mil 
The history of the TIPSTER Text program has multiple 
threads. And, as preparation of this report marks the end of 
Phase I of a two-phase lxogram, part of the history is plan- 
ning for Phase II, maintaining the successful threads. 
One of the threads is the close cooperation of six govern- 
ment organizations in formulating and implementing the 
program. This included not only sharing in the program for- 
mulation and funding, but also sharing in the definition of 
the tasks, in the preparation of large text corpora used for 
development, and in the development and implementation 
of evaluation methodologies. 
The second thread is the cooperation of the contractors in
sharing ideas and resources while pursuing different, com- 
petitive approaches tothe problems of text processing. 
The third thread is the sponsorship of the international 
Message Understanding Conferences (MUC's) and Text 
Retrieval Conferences (TREC's). These conferences, which 
evaluated the state of the art and promoted text-processing 
R&D outside of the TIPSTER Text contracts, were orga- 
nized by NRaD and NIST. MUC-1 and MUC-2 preceded 
and set the stage for TIPSTER, before the sponsorship of 
these conferences became part of the program. 
Formulat ion  of  the Program.  
The concept of the TIPSTER Text program was developed 
at ARPA beginning in June 1989, following the end of 
MUC-2. The promising results of that conference, along 
with an appreciation of the need for automated handling of 
large volumes of text, led to the formulation of a text-pro- 
cessing technology-development plan. ARPA approved 
funding for the program which, in taking some risks in 
developing the technology, could result in substantial bene- 
fits for facing the government's ever-growing need for sort- 
ing and analyzing large volumes of text. 
Beginning in January 1990, a succession of meetings were 
held among government agencies interested in the develop- 
ment and use of text-processing technology. From this 
came the agreement for sharing the planning, funding, and 
execution of the progran~ 
Significant decisions included having a program with (1) 
two-phases: two years of R&D into advanced algorithms, 
followed by two-years of development ofprototype/dem- 
onstration systems; (2) separate focuses on detection 
(retrieval and routing) and on extraction (understanding); 
(3) emphasis on domain and language portability; (4) peri- 
odic evaluation of complete systems; (5) development by 
the government of large corpora for training and testing of 
corpus-based techniques and system development and eval- 
uation. 
In June of 1990, a BAA was published soliciting proposals 
for participation i  the program. This led to the selection of 
three contractors for investigating different approaches to
detection and another three for extraction. Clarification of 
the proposals, election of sources and negotiating the con- 
tracts took most of fiscal 1991. 
Phase I of the Program 
Prior to the beginning of the contractors' work, the govern- 
ment began an intensive, two-year effort into the acquisi- 
tion and preparation of annotated corpora for the project, as 
described in the separate sections on detection and extrac- 
tion. 
The virtual start of TIPSTER Text Phase I occurred at a 
kickoff workshop held in September of 1992. The govern- 
ment reviewed the framework, objectives and plans for the 
following two years of work. The contractors described 
their specific approaches todetection and extraction and 
laid the groundwork for the future sharing of ideas and of 
software and data resources. The workshop included paral- 
lel working sessions for discussion of specific issues in the 
different areas of research, including details for addressing 
the different domains and different languages and the gov- 
ernment's preparation of the data. 
The workshops were repeated at 6-month intervals for the 
duration of Phase I. Selected researchers from other ARPA 
Human Language Technology (HLT) programs were also 
invited. In connection with the 12-month, 18-month and 
24-month (final) meeting, uniform evaluations of system 
performance were conducted and reported at the meetings. 
Between meetings, there were frequent exchanges of infor- 
3 
mation among the government and the contractors (with 
heavy use of electronic mail) and, by the end of the two 
years, a sizable catalog of shareable resources had been 
developed. 
The availability of dual-use funding permitted the addition 
of an additional detection and an additional extraction con- 
tractor for the final year of Phase I. 
TIPSTER Text contractors were required to participate in 
MUC or TREC. MUC-5 and TREC-2, using TIPSTER 
evaluation techniques, were held to coincide with the final 
Phase I evaluation so as to provide a measure of the state of 
the art and identify good performers. Phase I of the TIP- 
STER program concluded with the 24-month workshop. 
Phase I I  P lann ing  
During the last year of Phase I, the government began plan- 
ning Phase II. Scenarios were developed to indicate the 
variety of actual applications of the systems to be devel- 
oped. A two-tiered program of (1) continued algorithm 
development and (2) transfer of technology into demonstra- 
tion projects was defined 
The management of Phase II will follow the successful 
threads of Phase I. There will be close cooperation among 
the government agencies and the contractors. There will be 
regular workshops, corpora for development and testing 
and periodic evaluations. MUC and TREC will be contin- 
ued and there will be increased interaction with the ARPA 
HLT community. Contractors will share software using a 
license developed by that community. 
The design of the Phase I systems and analysis of the sce- 
narios indicated the complementary nature of detection and 
extraction operations and the desirability of supporting both 
capabilities within a single system. There also appeared to 
be many similar modules in the diverse systems. From this, 
it was determined that an initial activity of Phase II will be 
the development of a common, open software architecture 
for the implementation f text-processing systems. This 
architecture will also facilitate sharing of the development 
tasks, transferring technology toactual applications, future 
R&D into improved algorithms and continuous upgrading 
of systems which use the architecture. The architecture will 
stress functional and knowledge-based modularity and will 
use an SGML-Iike language for tagging text transferred 
between the modules. 
This architecture will be developed as part of Phase II R&D 
through the cooperative efforts of multiple contractors, 
coordinated by an independent Systems Engineering/Con- 
figuration Management contractor. The R&D contractors 
will then be tasked to fit their system modules into the 
architecture they have designed. Phase II R&D will also 
include improvement of algorithms and research into com- 
bining the results of the application of diverse xtraction 
and detection techniques. 
A BAA soliciting proposals for participation i Phase II 
R&D was issued in August 1993, with responses due from 
the bidders in October. Selection and negotiation isplanned 
to be completed so that work may begin early in the spring 
of 1994. Bidders will also be judged as potential sources for 
the demonstration projects. Individual agencies will issue 
separate RFP's for each such project. For each project, a 
demonstration system based on the architecture and mod- 
ules developed in the R&D tier will be developed, installed 
and evaluated inthe processing of actual "operational" data. 
Needs for architecture and algorithm improvements or a ci~ii- 
tional research will be fed back to the R&D projects. 
Procurement and award of the demonstration projects will 
be coordinated with the development ofthe architecture. 
4 
