THE TEXT RETRIEVAL CONFERENCES 
Donna Harman 
National Institute of Standards. 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
harman@magi.ncsl.nist.gov 
There have been two Text REtrieval conferences frRECs); 
TREC-1 in November 1992, with 28 participants, and 
TREC-2 in August 1993, with 31 participants. This confer- 
ence was inspired by the very successful MUC effort, and 
by the availability of the new large English test collection 
built for TIPSTER. Whereas an important goal for ARPA 
was to investigate a broad range of detection (retrieval) 
techniques, one of the other goals of the conference was to 
encourage the use of this collection by many experimenters 
in the information retrieval community. It was hoped that 
by providing a very large test collection, and encouraging 
interaction with other groups in a friendly evaluation 
forum, a new thrust in information retrieval would occur. It 
was also hoped that increased interaction between commer- 
cial and academic groups would result in a transfer of new 
retrieval techniques into the commercial setting, enabling 
better products in the long-term for ARIA cfients. 
The test design and test collection used for document detec- 
tion in TIPSTER (and described in a later section of this 
proceedings) was the same used in the TREC conferences. 
The test collection consists of over 1 million documents 
from diverse full-text sources, 150 topics, and the set of rel- 
evant documents or "fight answers" to those topics. The 
participants in TREC ran the same evaluation tasks as in 
TIPSTER, sent results into NIST for evaluation, and pre- 
sented the evaluation results at the conferences. 
There was a large variety of retrieval techniques reported 
on. including methods using automatic thesaurii, sophisti- 
cated term weighting, natural language techniques, rele- 
vance feedback, and advanced pattern matching. As results 
had been run through a common evaluation package, 
groups were able to compare the effectiveness of different 
techniques, and discuss how differences among the systems 
affected performance. Proceedings with papers from all 
participating roups have been published. \[1,2\]. 
The TREC conferences have proved to be very successful, 
allowing broad participation i  the overall ARPA TIP- 
STER effort, and causing widespread use of a very large 
test collection. Both conferences have had very open, hon- 
est discussions of technical issues, and there have been 
large amounts of "cross-fertilization" of ideas. This will be 
a continuing effort, with a TREC-3 conference scheduled 
for November 1994. The format will be similar to that of 
the first two conferences, but it is expected that even more 
universities and companies will participate, and that some 
of the tasks will be changed slightly to increase the amount 
of scientific knowledge that can be gained from the 
research going into these conferences. It is highly likely 
that a second language (Spanish) will also be used in 
retrieval. 
\[ 1\] Harman D. (Ed.). "The First Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC-1). National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Special Publication 500-207, 1993 
\[2\] Harman D. (Ed.). "The Second Text REtrieval Confer- 
ence (TREC-1). National Institute of Standards and Tech- 
nology Special Publication 500-215, in press. 
7 
