DOCUMENT DETECTION OVERVIEW 
Donna Harman 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Gaithersburg, MD. 20899 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The goal of the document detection half of the TIPSTER 
project wasto significantly advance the state of the art in 
effective document detection from large, real-world ocu- 
ment collections. This document detection eeded to be 
used in both the routing environment (static queries 
against aconstant stream of new data) and the adhoc envi- 
ronment (new queries against archival data). An addition- 
al requirement was that the algorithms for these tasks be 
as domain and language independent as possible. To 
demonstrate language independence, the project was done 
both in Japanese and English. To demonstrate domain in- 
dependence, the test collection was selected to cover 
many different subject areas and different document s ruc- 
tures. 
The document detection task mirrors the general task 
known as information retrieval. This area of research as 
seen over 30 years of experimentation \[1\], leaving a 
legacy of proven evaluation methodologies. The most 
prominent of these methodologies is the use of a test col- 
lection. A test collection for information retrieval consists 
of a set of documents, a set of test queries or questions, 
and a set of relevance judgments that are considered to be 
the "right" answers to the questions. The first test collec- 
tions, such as the Cranfield collection, were built in the 
early 1960's. The Cranfield collection contains 1400 doc- 
uments (all abstracts), 225 queries (several sentence natu- 
ral language statements), and 1827 relevance judgments, 
or an average of about 6 relevant documents per query. 
Since the early 1960's several other test collections have 
been built, but none contain the extremely large numbers 
of documents necessary to reflect he environment to be 
modeled in TIPSTER. 
The first step of this project, therefore, was to create a 
very large test collection and to design the test methodolo- 
gy and evaluation measures needed for TIPSTER. The 
test design was based on traditional information retrieval 
models, and is detailed in the next section. Evaluation 
was done using recall, precision and fallout measures. 
These measures are discussed in the section on evaluation 
metrics. 
The test design and test collection used for TIPSTER was 
also used for both the TREC conferences \[2,3\]. The only 
difference between the evaluation done for the TIPSTER 
contractors and the TREC participants was in the evalua- 
tion schedule and in the number of results submitted for 
evaluation. The first TREC conference took place 2 
months after the 12-month TIPSTER evaluation and the 
second TREC conference coincided with the 24-month 
TIPSTER evaluation. The TIPSTER contractors had an 
additional evaluation at 18 months. TREC participants 
were limited to submitting only 2 sets of results for adhoc 
or routing evaluation, whereas the TIPSTER contractors 
were allowed to submit an unlimited number of runs for 
evaluation. 
2. TEST DESIGN 
The test design called for the creation of a set of training 
data and a set of test data. The training data consisted of 
large numbers of documents (between 1 and 2 gigabytes 
of text), 50 training topics, and lists of documents for each 
of the topics that were known to be relevant (the "fight an- 
swers"). The test data consisted of 50 new topics and 
about a gigabyte of new documents. 
A slight departure from traditional information retrieval 
methodology was needed to better handle the TIPSTER 
environment. All previous test collections have assumed 
that the test questions or topics are closely related to the 
actual queries submitted to the retrieval systems, as the 
test questions are generally transformed automatically in- 
to the structure of terms ubmitted to the retrieval systems 
as input. This input structure is called the query in the 
TIPSTER environment, with the test question itself re- 
ferred to as the topic. Since most previous research as 
involved simple automatic generation ofqueries from top- 
ics, there was no need for a distinction to be made be- 
tween topics and queries. In TIPSTER this distinction be- 
came important because the topics needed to carry a large 
amount of highly specific information, and the methods of 
query construction therefore became more complex. 
Training 
Topics 
(T-Train) 
Test 
Topics 
(T-Test) 
Q1 
1 
Q3 
Training 
Documents 
(D-Train) 
Test 
Documents 
(D-Test) 
Figure 1 -- The TIPSTER Document Detection Task 
Figure 1 shows a schematic of the test design, including 
the various components of the test methodology. The dia- 
gram reflects the four data sets (2 sets of topics and 2 sets 
of documents) that were provided to contractors. The first 
set of topics and documents (T-Train and D-Train) were 
provided to allow system training and to serve as the base 
for routing and adhoc experiments. The roudng task 
assumes a static set of topics (T-Train), with evaluation of 
routing done by providing new test documents (D-Test). 
The adhoc task assumes a static set of documents (D- 
Train), with evaluation of adhoc retrieval done by provid- 
ing new topics (T-Test). 
Three different sets of queries were generated from the 
data sets. Q1 is the set of queries (probably multiple sets) 
created to help in adjusting a retrieval system to this task. 
The results of this research were used to create Q2, the 
routing queries to be used against he new test documents 
(D-Test). Q3 is the set of queries created from the new 
test topics (T-Test) as adhoc queries for .~earching against 
the old documents (D-Train). The results from searches 
using Q2 and Q3 were the official evaluation results ent 
to NIST for both TIPSTER and TREC. 
The Japanese language test design paralleled exactly the 
English language test design. 
3. EVALUATION SCHEDULE 
For the English language document detection task there 
were three evaluations conducted uring the 2-year phase 
I program. 
12-month evaluation 
? D-Train--disk 1 (about I gigabyte of documents) 
? T-Train -- topics 1-50 
? D-Test -- disk 2 (about 1 gigabyte of documents) 
? T-Test -- topics 51-100 
10 
? routing test -- topics 1-50 against disk 2 
Because of the lateness of data availability, and the 
scarcity of sample relevance assessments for training, the 
emphasis was put on doing adhoc evaluation and only half 
of the routing test was done. 
18-month evaluation 
? D-Train -- disks 1 & 2 (about 2 gigabytes of docu- 
ments) 
? T-Train -- topics 51-100 
? D-Test -- subset of future disk 3 (about 500 
megabytes of documents) 
? T-Test -- revised topics 1-50 
? adhoc test -- topics 1-50 against disks 1 & 2 
? routing test -- topics 51-100 against subset of disk 3 
By the 18-month evaluation point, large numbers of rele- 
vance judgments were available for training (due to the 
many TREC-1 participants). This second evaluation 
therefore concentrated onthe routing task, although adhoc 
evaluation was also done. 
24-month evaluation 
? D-Train -- disks 1 & 2 (about 2 gigabytes of docu- 
ments) 
? T-Train -- topics 1-100 
? D-Test -- disk 3 (about 1 gigabyte of documents) 
? T-Test -- topics 101-150 
? adhoc test -- topics 101-150 against disks 1 & 2 
? routing test -- topics 51-100 against all of disk 3 
This data point corresponded directly to the TREC-2 data 
and therefore allows comparison between the 24-month 
TIPSTER results and the TREC-2 results. 
4. SPECIF IC  TASK GUIDEL INES 
Because the TIPSTER contractors and TREC participants 
used a wide variety of indexing/knowledge base building 
techniques, and a wide variety of approaches to generate 
search queries, it was important to establish clear guide- 
lines for the evaluation task. The guidelines deal with the 
methods of indexing/knowledge base construction, and 
with the methods of generating the queries from the sup- 
plied topics. In general they were constructed toreflect an 
actual operational environment, and to allow .as fair as 
possible a separation among the diverse query construc- 
tion approaches. 
There were guidelines for constructing and manipulating 
the system data structures. These structures were defined 
to consist of the original documents, any new structures 
built automatically from the documents ( uch as inverted 
files, thesauri, conceptual networks, etc.) and any new 
structures built manually from the documents (such as 
thesauri, synonym lists, knowledge bases, rules, etc.). 
The following guidelines were developed for the TIP- 
STER task. 
1. System data structures hould be built using the 
initial training set (documents D-Train, training 
topics T-Train, and the relevance judgments). 
They may be modified based on the test docu- 
ments D-Test, but not based on the test topics. In 
particular, the processing of one test topic should 
not affect he processing of another test topic. For 
example, it is not allowed to update a system 
knowledge base based on the analysis of one test 
topic in such a way that the interpretation f sub- 
sequent test topics was changed in any fashion. 
2. There are several parts of the Wall Street Journal 
and the Ziff material that contain manually 
assigned controlled or uncontrolled index terms. 
These fields are delimited by SGML tags, as spec- 
ified in the documentation files included with the 
da~ Since the primary focus is on retrieval and 
routing of naturally occurring text, these manually 
indexed terms should not be used. 
3. Special care should be used in handling the rout- 
ing topics. In a true routing situation, a single 
document would be indexed and compared against 
the routing topics. Since the test documents are 
generally indexed as a complete set, routing 
should be simulated by not using any test docu- 
ment information (such as IDF based on the test 
collection, total frequency based on the test collec- 
tion, etc.) in the searching. It is permissible to use 
training-set collection information however. 
Additionally there were guidelines for constructing the 
queries from the provided topics. These guidelines were 
considered of great importance for fair system compari- 
son and were therefore carefully constructed. Three 
generic ategories were defined, based on the amount and 
kind of manual intervention used. 
1. Method 1 -- completely automatic initial query 
construction. 
adhoc queries -- The system will automatically 
extract information from the topic (the topic fields 
used should be identified) to construct the query. 
The query will then be submitted to the system 
(with no manual modifications) and the results 
11 
. 
. 
from the system will be the results submitted to 
NIST. There should be no manual intervention 
that would affect he results. 
routing queries -- The queries should be con- 
structed automatically using the training topics, 
the training relevance judgments and the training 
documents. The queries hould then be submitted 
to NIST before the test documents are released 
and should not be modified after that point. The 
unmodified queries should be run against he test 
documents and the results ubmitted to NIST. 
Method 2 -- manual initial query construction. 
adhoc queries -- The query is constructed in some 
manner from the topic, either manually or using 
machine assistance. The methods used should be 
identified, along with the human expertise (both 
domain expertise and computer expertise) needed 
to construct a query. Once the query has been 
constructed, it will be submitted to the system 
? (with no manual intervention), and the results 
from the system will be the results submitted to 
NIST. There should be no manual intervention 
after initial query conslrucfion that would affect 
the results. (Manual intervention is covered by 
Method 3.) 
routing queries -- The queries should be con- 
structed in the same manner as the adhoc queries 
for method 2, but using the training topics, rele- 
vance judgments, and training documents. They 
should then be submitted to NIST before the test 
documents are released and should not be modi- 
fied after that point. The unmodified queries 
should be run against he test documents and the 
results ubmitted to NIST. 
Method 3 -- automatic or manual query construc- 
tion with feedback. 
adhoc queries -- The initial query can be con- 
structed using either Method 1 or Method 2. The 
query is submitted to the system, and a subset of 
the retrieved ocuments i used for manual feed- 
back, i.e. a human makes judgments about he rel- 
evance of the documents in this subset. These 
judgments may be communicated to the system, 
which may automatically modify the query, or the 
human may simply choose to modify the query 
himself. At some point, feedback should end, and 
the query should be accepted as final. Systems 
that submit runs using this method must submit 
several different sets of results to allow tracking o f  
the time/cost benefit of doing relevance f edback. 
routing queries -- Method 3 cannot be used for 
routing queries as routing systems have typically 
not supported feedback. 
5. EVALUATION METRICS  
5.1 Recall/Precision Curves 
Standard recall/precision figures were calculated for each 
TIPSTER and TREC system and the tables and graphs for 
the results were provided. Figure 2 shows typical 
recall/precision curves. The x axis plots the recall values 
at fixed levels of recall, where 
Recall = 
number of relevant items retrieved 
wtal number of relevant items in collection 
The y axis plots the average precision values at those 
given recall values, where precision is calculated by 
number of relevant items retrieved 
Precision' = 
wtal number of items retrieved 
These curves represent averages over the 50 topics. The 
averaging method was developed many years ago \[2\] and 
is well accepted by the information retrieval community. 
It was therefore used unchanged for the TIPSTER evalua- 
tion. The curves how system performance across the full 
range of retrieval, i.e. at the early stage of retrieval where 
the highly-ranked documents give high accuracy or preci- 
sion, and at the final stage of retrieval where there is usu- 
ally a low accuracy, but more complete retrieval. Note 
that the use of these curves assumes a ranked output from 
a system. Systems that provide an unranked set of docu- 
ments are known to be less effective and therefore were 
not tested in the TIPSTER/TREC programs. 
The curves in figure 2 show that system A has a much 
higher precision at the low recall end of the graph and 
therefore is more accurate. System B however has higher 
precision at the higher recall end of the curve and there- 
fore will give a more complete set of relevant documents, 
assuming that the user is willing to look further in the 
ranked list. 
5.2 Reca l l / Fa l lout  Curves  
A second set of curves were calculated using the 
recall/fallout measures, where recall is defined as before 
and fallout is defined as 
number of nonrelevant i ems retrieved 
fallout = 
total number of nonrelevant i ems in collection 
12 
0.80 
Sample  Reca l l /P rec i s ion  Curves  
0.60 
o ~  
o ~  
0.40 
0.20 
0.00 
0.00  0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80  1 .00  
Reca l l  
4-  Sys tem A_~_ System B 
0.75 
Sample Recall/Fallout Curves 
0.7 
0.65 
0.6 
o 0.55 
0.5 
0.45 
0.4 
0.35 I l I I l I I I I 
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 
Fa l lout  
4 -  Sys tem A ~ System B 
1.00  
I I 
0.18 0.20 
Figure 2 -- A Sample Recall/Precision Curve 
Figure 3 -- A Sample i~ecall/Fallout Curve 
13 
Note that recall has the same definition as the probability 
of detection and that fallout has the same definition as the 
probability of false alarm, so that the recall/fallout curves 
are also the ROC (Relative Operating Characteristic) 
curves used in signal processing. A sample set of curves 
corresponding to the recall/precision curves are shown in 
figure 3. These curves show the same order of perfor- 
mance as do the recall/precision curves and are provided 
as an alternative method of viewing the results. The pre- 
sent version of the curves is experimental sthe curve cre- 
ation is particularly sensitive to scaling (what range is 
used for calculating fallout). The high precision perfor- 
mance does not show well in figure 3; the high recall per- 
formance dominates the curves. 
Whereas the recall/precision curves show the retrieval 
system results as they might be seen by a user (since pre- 
cision measures the accuracy of each retrieved ocument 
as it is retrieved), the recall/fallout curves emphasize the 
ability of these systems to screen out non-relevant mate- 
rial. In particular the fallout measure shows the discrima- 
tion powers of these systems on a large document collec- 
tion. Since recall/precision measures do not include any 
indication of the collection size, the recall and precision 
of a system based on a 1400 document collection could be 
the same as that of a system based on a million document 
collection, but obviously the discrimation powers on a 
million document collection would be much greater. This 
was not have been a problem on the smaller collections, 
but the discrimination power of systems on TIPSTER- 
sized collections i  very important. 
5.3 Single-Value Evaluation Measures 
In addition to these recall/precision and recall/fallout 
curves, there were 3 single-value measures often used in 
TIPSTER. The first two measures are precision averages 
across the curves, and the third measure is precision at a 
particular cutoff of documents retrieved. 
One of the averages, the non-interpolated average rreci- 
sion, combines the average precision for each topic, with 
that topic average computed by taking the precision after 
every retrieved relevant document. The final average cor- 
responds to the area under an ideal (non-interpolated) 
recall/precision curve. 
The second precision average (the l 1-point precision 
average) averages across interpolated precision values 
(which makes it somewhat less accurate). It is calculated 
by averaging the precision at each of the 11 standard 
recall points on the curve (0.0, 0.1 . . . . .  1.0) for each topic. 
Often this average is stated as an improvement over some 
baseline average 11-point precision. 
The third measure used is an average of the precision at 
each topic after 100 documents have been retrieved for 
that topic. This measure is useful because it contains no 
interpolation, and reflects a clearly comprehended 
retrieval point. It took on added importance in the TIP- 
STER environment because only the top I00 documents 
retrieved for each topic were actually assessed. For this 
reason it produces a guaranteed evaluation point for each 
system. 
5.4 Problems with Evaluation 
Since this was the first time that such a large collection of 
text has been used in evaluation, there were some prob- 
lems using the existing methods of evaluation. The major 
problem concerned a thresholding effect caused by an 
inability to evaluate ALL documents retrieved by a given 
system. 
For the TIPSTER 12-month evaluation and TREC-1 the 
groups were asked to send in only the top 200 documents 
retrieved by their systems. This artificial document cutoff 
is relatively low and systems did not retrieve all the rele- 
vant documents for most topics within the cutoff. All 
documen~ retrieved beyond the 200 were considered non- 
relevant by default and therefore the recall/precision 
curves became inaccurate after about 40% recall on aver- 
age. The 18-month TIPSTER evaluation used a cutoff of 
500 documents, and the TIPSTER 24-month and TREC-2 
used the top 1000 documents. Figure 4 shows the differ- 
ence in the curves produced by these evaluation thresh- 
olds, including a curve for no threshold (similar to the 
way evaluation has been done on the smaller collections.). 
These curves how that the use of a 1000-document cutoff 
has mostly resolved the thresholding problem. 
Two more issues in evaluation have become important. 
The first issue involves the need for more statistical evalu- 
ation. As will be seen in the results, the recall/precision 
curves are often close, and there is a need to check if there 
is truly any statistically significant differences between 
two systems' results or two sets of results from the same 
system. This problem is currently under investigation i
collaboration with statistical groups experienced in the 
- evaluation of information retrieval systems. 
The second issue involves getting beyond the averages to 
better understand system performance. Because of the 
huge number of documents and the long topics, it is very 
difficult o perform failure analysis, or any type of analy- 
sis on the results to better understand the retrieval pro- 
cesses being tested. Without better understanding of
underlying system performance, it will be hard to consoli- 
date research progress. Some preliminary analysis of per 
topic performance was provided for the TIPSTER 
24-month evaluation and TREC-2, and more attention will 
be given to this problem in the future. 
14 
. m  
gM 
Ef fec ts  o f  Cuto f f  on  Eva luat ion  
0.40  
0 .80  
0 .60  
0 .20  
w m 
O.OO O.20  0 .40  0 .60  0 .80  1 .OO 
Reca l l  
at  200  +at5OO ~. at  1000 o fu l l  
0.OO 
1.OO 
Figure 4: Effect of evaluation cutoffs on recall/precision curves 
6. REFERENCES 
\[1\] Belkin N.J, and Croft W.B. Retrieval Techniques. In 
Williams, M. (Ed.), Annual Review of lnformation Science 
and Technology (pp. 109-145). New York, NY: Elsevier 
Science Publishers, 1987. 
\[2\] Harman D. (Ed.).The First Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC-1). National Institute of Standards and Technol- 
ogy Special Publication 500-207, 1993. 
\[3\] Harman D. (Ed.).The Second Text REtrieval Confer- 
ence (TREC-2). National Institute of Standards and Tech- 
nology Special Publication 500-215, in press. 
\[4\] Salton G. and McGill M. (1983). Introduction to Mod- 
ern Information Retrieval. New York, NY.: McGraw-HiU 
Book Company. 
1@ 
