TIPSTER PROGRAM OVERVIEW 
Roberta H. Merchant 
US Department of Defense 
Ft. Meade, MD 20755 
rhmerch@ afterlife.ncsc.mil 
1. TIPSTER PHASE I 
The task of TIPSTER Phase I was to advance the state of 
the art in two language technologies, Document Detection 
and Information Extraction. 
Document Detection includes two subtasks, routing (run- 
ning static queries against a stream of new data), and 
retrieval (running ad hoc queries against archival data). 
Information Extraction is a technology in which pre- 
specified types of information are located within free text, 
extracted, and placed within a database. 
2. THE STATE OF THE ART IN DOCUMENT 
DETECTION BEFORE TIPSTER 
Before TIPSTER users searching large volumes of data and 
using many queries had few information retrieval tools to 
use other than the boolean keyword search systems which 
had been developed more than a decade arlier. The charac- 
teristics of these boolean systems are: 
? low recall (the user loses an unknown quantity of 
useful information because the system is unable to 
retrieve many of the relevant documents) 
? low precision (the user has to read a very large num- 
ber of irrelevant documents which the system has 
mistakenly retrieved) 
? no ranking or prioritization (the user must scan the 
entire list of retrieved ocuments because a good 
document isjust as likely to be at the end of the list 
of retrieved ocuments as at the hesinning) 
? exact matches (the user must generate by hand vari- 
ant spellings or alternate word choices because there 
are no built-in rules for adding variants) 
? hand built queries (the user has to understand how 
the system works and the syntax of queries in order 
to use the system) 
3. DOCUMENT DETECTION DELIVERABLES IN 
PHASE H 
As a result of algorithm development in Phase I, during 
TIPSTER Phase lI. prototype systems will be built, giving 
the user Document Detection tools which feature the tech- 
nology developed inPhase I: 
? improved recall (comparative evaluation of systems 
in TIPSTER and TREC \[1\] has demonstrated higher 
recall of relevant documents) 
? improved precisica (the user will read fewer useless 
documents inorder to find the ones he wants) 
? ranked retrievals (the user reviews documents statis- 
tically ranked according to how well they match the 
query, thus improving the chances that he most use- 
ful documents will be near the top of the queue) 
? query expansion (the system, not the user, automati- 
cally expands queries to draw in more relevant doc- 
uments by using concept based tools such as 
tbesauri) 
? automatic query generation (the system uses a natu- 
ral language description of the subject supplied by 
the user to generate queries) 
4. THE STATE OF THE ART IN INFORMATION 
EXTRACTION BEFORE TIPSTER 
Notwithstanding ARPA and commercial support for the 
development of information extraction technology and the 
positive impact of the series of Message Understanding 
Conferences, before TIPSTER, information extraction had 
been applied to the database update task as largely a man- 
ual procedure. Manual extraction ischaracterized by: 
? wide variance in the accuracy and consistency of the 
database content 
? heavy labor commilanent 
? continuing cost expenditure and training demand 
? difficulty of porting to new domains 
? difficulty of extending within current domain 
The deployment ofinformation extraction systems was rare 
for both commercial nd Government applications. Such 
systems have been characterized by
? lack of extensibifity within dcanain 
t 
? lack of portability to new domains 
? language dependency (English only) 
? task dependency, solving a single problem with little 
reusability 
? high development cost with only system developer 
maintenance 
5. INFORMATION EXTRACTION DELIVERABLES 
IN PHASE H 
As a result of algorithm development i  Phase I, during 
TIPSTER Phase H. prototype systems will be built with the 
following characteristics: 
? increased extensibility within domain with reduced 
user involvement 
? greater ease of portability to new different domains 
? language independence, portability to new languages 
? task independence, solving multiple problems with 
reusable components 
? user f~useed maintenance with minimal system 
developer involvement 
These systems provide the user with extraction tools which 
feature: 
? accurate and consistent database content results 
? minimal user intervention i reviewing extraction 
results 
? initial cost expenditure with little maintenance ost 
? flexibility in managing the amount of informatien to 
be ex~acted 
? appficability o new tasks, such as indications/warn- 
ings, text tagging, and document detection support 
\[1\] The Text REtrieval Conferences (TREC's) are described 
in the Document Detecfien section. 
2 
