SPOT: TRW'S MULTI-LINGUAl, TEXT SEARCH TOOL 
Peggy Otsubo 
TRW Systems Deve lopment  Division 
R2/2162 
One Space Park  
Redondo Beach,  CA 90278 
peggy@wilbur.coyote.trw.com 
ABSTRACT 
TRW has developed a text search tool that  
allows users to enter a query in foreign lan- 
guages and retrieve documents hat match the 
query. A single query can contain words and 
phrases in a mix of different languages, with the 
foreign-language terms entered using the native 
script. The browser also displays the original 
document in its native script. Key terms in the 
browser display are highlighted. The interface is
targeted for the non-native speaker and includes 
a variety of tools to help formulate foreign-lan- 
guage queries. Spot has been designed to inter- 
face to multiple search engines through an 
object-oriented search engine abstraction layer. 
It currently supports Paracers Fast Data Finder 
search engine, with support for Excalibur's 
RetrievalWare currently being developed. 
1.0. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. Des ign  Object ives  
TRW has developed a text search tool that  
allows users to enter a query in a number of lan- 
guages and retrieve documents hat match the 
query. This text search tool is called Spot. The 
following subsections describe the design objec- 
tives and goals of Spot. 
1.1.1. Support multiple search engines 
Our government users currently use a variety of 
tools for different purposes. For example, an 
archival database is only available through a 
legacy text search system that  performs its 
searches very quickly, but lacks a great deal in 
search functionality. Other users use Paracel's 
Fast Data Finder search engine due to its power- 
ful search capabilities and are only able to access 
its power through the FDF search tool user inter- 
face. 
One of our design objectives was to handle multi- 
ple search engines within the same user interface 
tool. This provides users with a single user inter- 
face tool to learn, while providing them with a 
choice of search engines. Users might choose to 
perform a natural  anguage query using the 
Excalibur/ConQuest search engine's concept 
query and switch to the Fast Data Finder to 
search Chinese text. 
We also nimed to provide the users with the full 
functionality of each of the search engines. This 
approach necessitates a more generic approach to 
many functions to ensure that the same user 
interface can be tailored to differing search 
engine technologies. 
1.1.2. Support multi-lingual data 
Internationalized support is fairly easy to obtain 
commercially for a number of commonly-sup- 
ported languages. The commercial products for 
internationalization are designed to support he 
marketing of a tool in a specific set of foreign 
countries, where the menus, buttons, error mes- 
sages, and text all need to be displayed in the 
appropriate foreign language. For example, if a 
specific product needs to be marketed to the Jap- 
anese, it might be running under Sun's Japanese 
Language Environment, with JLE providing sup- 
port for entering and displaying Japanese text. 
Multi-lingual support, however, is very difficult 
to obtain commercially. Our user community con- 
sists of native-English speakers, who want the 
menus and buttons to appear in English, but 
require support for viewing foreign-language doc- 
uments in their native scripts, as well as entering 
foreign-language query terms in their native 
57 
scripts. For this functionality, internationalized 
support is inadequate. 
1.1.3. Support query generation tools 
Users who are not native speakers of the foreign 
language in which they are submitting a query 
would like tools to assist in building queries. For 
example, we located a large Japanese-to-English 
thesaurus that was available in electronic for~L 
It would be very useful for native-English speak- 
ers to look up relevant words in the Japanese 
thesaurus for assistance in building their que- 
ries. 
In addition, words that are of a foreign origin are 
often transl i terated in a number of different 
ways. For example, the name "Kadafi" is often 
spelled "Khadafi" or "Gadam'. Query generation 
tools that allow users to enter "Kadafi" and find 
the other possible spellings are designed into 
Spot. 
1.2. Max imize  per fo rmance  
Spot was designed to be the user interface for a 
large archival database of hundreds of gigabytes 
of data. It needs to provide hundreds of users 
with access to this database. 
An archival  database using the Fast  Data 
Finder was implemented using Paracers Batch 
Search Server (BSS) product. Spot currently 
interfaces to this FDF archival database. Devel- 
opment is currently proceeding to interface Spot 
to an Excalibur/ConQuest archival database. 
Our objective in developing functionality, includ- 
ing multi-l ingual query generation tools and 
query functionality, has emphasized solutions 
that work very quickly, usually by exploiting the 
features of a specific search engine. 
Speed and throughput of searches through the 
FDF hardware search engine was measured 
using a commercial FDF-3 system.A single FDF- 
3 produced a search rate of around 3.5 MB/s, 
which could be obtained while searching 20 to 40 
average queries simultaneously. A system of 
multiple FDFs can linearly expand the search 
rate. 
1.3. User  In ter face  H igh l ights  
Some of the highlights of our current user inter- 
face system include the following: 
? Multi-lingual query entry 
? Multiple languages in a single query 
? Queries can be saved, loaded, edited, 
printed 
? Customizable fill-in-the-boxes query form 
? Query generation tools 
? Highlights query terms when browsing 
search results 
? Display of search results in native script 
? Copy-and-paste from Browser into a Query 
? Search using Paracers Fast Data Finder 
? Search using Excalibur/ConQuest's 
RetrievalWare 
2.0. KEY  INNOVATIONS 
We have developed a multi-lingual text search 
tool that is being enthusiastically embraced by 
users. Some of our key innovations include: 
? Search and retrieval of multi-lingual data, 
using queries pecifying search terms in 
different languages and encoding sets. 
? Display of search results in native scripts 
including Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Ara- 
bic, Cyrillic, ThAi, and Vietnamese. 
? Multi-lingual query entry using NMSU's 
multi-lingual text widget (MUTT). 
? Multiple languages in a single query. 
? Multiple encoding sets in a single query. 
? Query generation tools to help non-native 
speakers build queries in different lan- 
guages. 
? Allow users to perform external processes 
on portions of browsed text. 
? Fill-in-the-box, customizable query entry 
forms. 
? Easy-to-use date-oriented database selec- 
tion screen. 
? Allow users to select heir desired search 
engine. 
58 
