CRL's APPROACH TO MET 
Jim Cowie 
jcowie@nmsu.edu 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University, Box 30001/3CRL, as Cruces, NM, 88003 
Summary 
From February to April CRL carried out investiga- 
tions into the modification of our l~n~Hsh name recogni- 
tion software developed for MUC-6 \[1\] to Chinese and 
Spanish. In addition aJapanese system, developed under 
Tipster Phase I \[2\], was modified to comply with the 
MET task. Finally learning methods developed for 
MUC-6 were adapted to handle Chinese. All systems 
performed with good levels of accuracy and it is clear 
that further Dining and refinement, for which there was 
no time or resources, would lead to even higher levels of 
pe~forma.nc?. 
A Pattern Based Approach 
Three pattern based systems were produced for 
Spanish, lapanese, and Chinese. The basic operation of 
each is the same, although in the case of Chinese very 
few patterns were produced ue to time and resource 
constraints. The data for each system was derived from 
tralnin~ texts plus additional data derived from cor- 
pora and other CRL data developed for machine transla- 
tion. No attempt was made to segment the texts used in 
the Chinese system. The Japanese system used informa- 
tion produced by the Juman segmentor, from Kyoto 
University. 
It is important to have basic tools for handling two 
byte character sets. A lookup program and a sort have to 
be able to handle character order based on two bytes. 
These had already been developed as part of CRL's Tip- 
ster phase I work. Given these and a tool to be used for 
human tagging and a program to extract agged text of 
different ypes and place it in files it is possible to 
develop a naive system which recognizes previously 
tagged names very rapidiy. 
Thus - 
HUMAN + TEXTS + TEXT TAGGING TOOL - 
> TAGGED TEXTS 
TAGGED TEXTS + EXTRACTION PROGRAM-  
> KNOWN L ISTS  
KNOWN L ISTS  + SORT - > UP L ISTS  
and  f ina l ly  
LOOKUP L ISTS  + TEXT + LOOKUP PRO-  
GRAM -> TAGGED TEXTS 
The obvious problems here are that new names will 
appear and short forms will be recxL~nized in contexts 
where they are incorrect. For Chinese, however, this 
approach already gave reasonably high performance 
both on test and evaluation data. 
The next stage is to develop lexicons containing 
semantic tags for component parts of names, and also 
for indicators that occur in the surrounding text. For 
example beginning organization words in CRL's Span- 
ish system include the following - ASOCIACION, 
BANCO, BANKHAUS, BOLSA. These too can be 
partly derived from the training data and then extended 
manually. Lists of proper names, locations, titles, pro- 
fessions and known words in the language are also used. 
For personal names in Spanish the English name fists 
which were partitioned into unambiguous names (in 
English e.g. CHARLES) and ambiguous names (e.g. 
BAKER) were repartitioned to fists of ambiguous and 
unambiguous names in Spanish using a morphological 
analyzer and a Spanish dictionary (CHAI~I.FS is now 
ambiguous and BAKER not). The Japanese system was 
aheady constructed in this manner and similar develop- 
ments on a lesser scale carried out for Chinese. Sets of 
patterns which recognize the basic semantic tags are 
now developed and coded up as 'lex' pattern recogniz- 
ers. So our system now looks like - 
LOOKUP L ISTS  + TEXT + LOOKUP PRO-  
GRAM -> PART IALLY  TAGGED TEXTS 
(PTT) 
SEMANTIC  L ISTS  + P T T + LOOKUP 
PROGRAM - > MARKED TEXT 
MARKED TEXTS + PATTERN RECOGNIZERS 
-> TAGGED TEXTS 
467 
At this point it is possible to further develop at- 
terns and data by scoring system performance against 
some, unseen, set of pre-tagged texts. Some short forms 
of names are, however, particularly difficult o identify 
in isolation and certain segments of the text, in particu- 
lar capitalized headlines in Spanish, are also difficult if 
the system uses capitalization. This is most easily han- 
dled by a post tag stage which takes names discovered in
the text and generates a list of names which are then 
converted to appropriate short forms. A final pass 
through the whole texts using the lookup tool and the 
list of full and abbreviated names catches many of the 
short forms. 
There is obviously some point at which the recogni- 
tion and classification gets difficult. The rules for MET 
made a distinction between an organization name and 
the same name used to indicate alocations; this can be a 
very vague distinction and one probably better handled 
by other stage in the system. Also a wide range of enti- 
ties were allowed as organizations, typical patterns for 
pop group names can be a lot more eccentric than com- 
puny names, a grainier division would separate some 
difficult ypes from more conventionally usages. Finally 
there are some forms where a great deal of context and/ 
.or world knowledge are needed to arrive at a CO~TeCt 
classification. These fortunately are only a few percent 
of the total cases in the type of texts used for MET. 
Dates and numbers were also recognized using pat- 
terns of semantic types. These performed extremely 
accurately with high precision and recall. 
P rob lems 
The main problems were lack of time and people to 
work on the task. An estimated two man months of 
effort was put into all three systems. An additional prob- 
lem lies in the original design of our systems which do 
not allow multiple semantic tags on words or phrase. 
Thus a word might be a part of a person name and a 
location but it is tagged as a location due to the ordering 
of the tagging process. This in turn requires more com- 
plex and less accurate patterns to he used, which allow 
locations as part of peoples names and so on. Clearly a 
more complicated lexical structure would allow simpler 
patterns. Given the short development time for the MET 
evaluation it was not possible to develop the necessary 
infrastructure to support this more complex lexicon. 
A Learning Based Approach 
Our learning system has already been described in 
the MUC-6 Proceedings \[2\]. It is based on automatically 
creating decision trees using Q,,inlan's ID3 algorithm. 
These decision trees use a limited context of text in the 
case of Chinese four pairs of characters before and four 
pairs after a point in the text to decide ff a name starts 
(or ends) at this position. High precision, and low recall 
results were possible using the extremely small amount 
of training data available for MET. CRL extended this 
data by hand tagging all the texts provided for MET. 
Additional data was then generated by tagging known 
names in XinHua newswire and extracting these and 
their contexts to provide further training data. This 
increase in positive examples increased both precision 
and recall significantly. The final problem with adapting 
the method to Chinese was finding nnmatched brackets 
and fixing them. One decision tree finds the start of an 
organization, but the other fails to identify the end. In 
English, once the missing bracket is identified, a simple 
heuristic based on capitalization, conjunction and some 
other common words (e.g. of) was used to fix the miss- 
ing bracket. For Chinese we developed a frequency list 
of characters occurring before and after each name type. 
This was used to compute the most likely insertion point 
for the missing bracket. This approach needs further 
analysis to determine its success. 
The adaptation of the English learning system to 
Chinese took around one and a half man months. 
References 
1. Cowie, J, "Description of the CRL/NMSU Sys- 
tems Used for MUC-6" in Proceedings of the Sixth Mes- 
sage Understanding Conference (MUC-6), Morgan- 
Kaufman, 1996. 
2. Cowie, J., Guthrie, L.,et al "The DIDEROT Sys- 
tem" in Proceeding of the Tipster Text Program (Phase 
I), 223-235, Morgan-Kaufman,1993. 
468 
