CERVANTES - A SYSTEM SUPPORTING TEXT ANALYS IS  
Jim Cowie 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University, Box 30001/3CRL, Las Cruces, NM, 88003 
COTR: Lynne Rich, DoD, larich~afterlife.ncsc.mil 
Principal Investigators: Jim Cowie, 
jcowie@umsu.edu (505) 646-5181, W'dliam Ogden, 
ogden@umsu.edu (505) 646 6222, Ted ~mnlng (Now 
at HNC) 
Summary 
CRL is engaged in the development of document 
management software and user interfaces to support 
government analysts in their information analysis tasks. 
It is also continuing to develop language t chnologies to 
support document detection and information extraction 
in a variety of languages. It has also been responsible for 
the integration and delivery of both the six and twelve 
month Tipster demonstration systems and the develop- 
ment of the first Tipster document manager. 
Approach 
CRL has provided general purpose nabling tech- 
nology for several aspects of the Tipster Phase H pro- 
gram. This work has been carried out in close 
compliance with the decisions of the Architecture Work- 
ing Group. The software developed at CRL is based on 
CRL's extensive xperience ofuser interface support for 
government analysts developed uring Phase I of Tip- 
ster. In addition we have developed a large scale docu- 
ment management system, which allows documents 
used in a Tipster compliant system to be handled in a 
nniform manner. 
CRL has investigated the problem of information 
retrieval against collections of text written in multiple 
languages. This multilingual information retrieval capa- 
bility is being designed so that it can be integrated into 
any statistical information retrieval system. 
Achievements 
CRL has been heavily involved in the design of the 
Tipster Architecture. Prototype document managers 
supporting the architecture were implemented and used 
to support he Tipster 6 and 12 month damonstration 
systems. A mature version of the document manager 
software has now been developed and distributed. CRL 
has also developed a Tipster Architecture Validation 
Suite which allows the testing of Tipster Compliant 
Document Managers. Both these products will now be 
subject to an engineering review board. 
The CRL has provided mulfilingual Human-Com- 
puter Interface software, which conforms to the Tipster 
architecture. This includes a sophisticated ditor which 
allows the display and editing of annotations on docu- 
ments. A user can work with annotations produced by 
any Tipster compliant language processing software (e.g 
nama recognizers, phrase spotters). The editor supports 
multiple languages, including Arabic, Japanese, Span- 
ish, Chinese and Russian. All the CRL graphical user 
interface tools are now available to government agencies 
and to other research groups (see paper on Graphical 
User Interfaces). 
CRL has used the architecture as the foundation for 
other DoD programs - Oleada nd Temple (see separate 
s-mmaries). 
CRL has also made significant progress in its 
research in multi-lingual query generation. Methods 
have been developed to 'translate' Engfish queries into 
Spanish (see research papers) 
CRL has developed systems for recognizing proper 
names in English, Spanish, Japanese, and Chinese texts 
(see Multilingual Named Entity Task) 
Software Packages 
The following packages are available from CRL - a 
Tipster compliant document manager and user docu- 
mentafious, a Tipster document manager validation 
suite, a graphical user interface toolkit to support devel- 
opment of multi-lingual Tipster applications, and 
English name recognition software and data. 
49 
