AN EVALUATION OF COREFERENCE RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 
FOR ACQUIRING ASSOCIATED INFORMATION 
Lois C. Childs 
Lockheed Mar t in  Corporat ion  
P.O. Box 8048 
Philadelphia, PA 19101 
lois@mds.lmco.com 
(610) 354-5816 
Category - Information Extraction 
1. INTRODUCTION 
As part of our TIPSTER research program \[Con- 
tract Number 94-F133200-000\], wehave developed a 
variety of strategies toresolve coreferences within a free 
text document. Coreference is typically defined to 
mean the identification ofnoun phrases that refer to the 
same object. This paper investigates a more general 
view of coreference in which our automatic system 
identifies not only coreferenfial phrases, but also 
phrases which additionally describe an object. Corefer- 
ence has been found to be an important component of 
many applications. 
The following example illustrates ageneral view 
of coreference. 
American Express, the large financial 
institution, also known as Amex, will 
open an office in Peking. 
In this example, we would like to associate the fol- 
lowing information about American Express: 
its name is American Express; 
an alias for it is Amex; 
its location is Peking, China; and 
it can be described as the large financial 
institution. 
In the work described in this paper, our goal was 
to evaluate the contributions of various techniques for 
associating an entity with three types of information: 
1. NameV~atious 
. 
3. 
Data  Set  
Descriptive Phrases 
Location Information 
The MUC6 Template Element ask is typical of 
what our applications often require; it encapsulates in- 
formation about one entity within the Template Ele- 
ment. Since we have a way to evaluate our performance 
on this task via the MUC6 data, we used it to conduct our 
experiments. The corpus for the MUC6 Template Ele- 
ment ask consists of approximately 200 documents for 
development (pre- and post-dry-run) and 100 docu- 
ments for scoring. The scoring set had previously been 
held blind, but it has been released for the purposes of 
a thorough evaluation of our metheds. 
Scoring 
Scores discussed in this paper measure perfor- 
mance of experimental system reconfigurafions run on 
the 100 documents u ed for the final MUC6 evaluation. 
These scores were generated for inter-experiment com- 
parison proposes, using the MUC6 scoring program, 
v 1.3. Scores reported here are relevant only as relative 
measures within this paper and are not meant o repre- 
sent official performance measu~s. Official MUC6 
scores were generated using a later version of the scor- 
ing program. Furthermore, the scoring program results 
can vary depending on how the mapping between re- 
spouse and answer key is done. For example, if an auto- 
marie system has failed to make the link between a des- 
cdptor and a name, it may create two objects - - -  one for 
each. The scoring system ust hen decide which object 
to map to the answer key. 
Obiect 1 
NAME: American Express 
ALIAS: Amex 
TYPE: COMPANY 
LOCALE: Peking 
COUNTRY: China 
Obiect2 
DESCRIPTOR 
TYPE: 
the large financial 
institution 
COMPANY 
179 
Kev 
NAME: 
ALIAS: 
DESCRIPTOR: 
TYPE; 
LOCAl .~: 
COUNTRY: 
American Express 
Amex 
the large financial 
institution 
COMPANY 
Peking 
China 
The scoring program tries to optimize the scores 
during mapping but, if two objects would score equally, 
the scoring program chooses arbitrarily, thus, in effect, 
sacrificing aslot as a penalty for coreference failure. In 
the following example, the slot can be either NAME or 
DESCRIPTOR, depending on the mapping. 
Obiect 1 
NAME: American Express 
TYPE: COMPANY 
Obiect2 
DESCRIPTOR: 
TYPE: 
the large financial 
institution 
COMPANY 
Additionally, the answer key contains optional ob- 
jects which are included in the scoring calculations only 
ff they have been mapped to a response object. 'ntis 
sometimes causes a fluctuation in the number of pos- 
sible correct answers, as reported by the scoring pro- 
gram. The scores, therefore, do not represent an abso- 
lute measure of performance. 
Scores reported here use the following abbrevi- 
ations: 
POS possible correct answers 
ACT actual answers produced 
COR correct answers 
INC incorrect answers 
REC recall 
(% of the correct answers found) 
PRE precision 
(% of answers found that are correct) 
2. NAME VARIATIONS 
Identifying variations of a person name or orga- 
nization ame is a basic form of coreference that under- 
lies other strategies. Our process tores each newly rec- 
ognized named entity, along with its computed 
variations and acronyms. The variations and acronyms 
are algorithmlcally generated without reference to the 
text. These are stored in a temporary lexicon so that 
variations of the name in the text can be recognized and 
linked to the original occurrence. 
A careful examination of the name/alias results 
provides insight into the success of this technique. 
Approximately two-thirds of the aliases were cor- 
rectly identified. Of the one-third which were missed, 
besides an unfortunate system error which threw away 
four aliases which the system had found, five main 
groups of error were found. They can be categorized as 
follows: 
1. Corporate Subsidiaries 
2. Corporate Name Changes 
3. Missing Name 
4. Incomplete Name Variation 
5. UnusualFirstname 
Corporate Subsidiaries 
There were approximately five missed aliases that 
involved corporations and their subsidiaries. In these 
cases, the aliases were assigned to the wrong entity. 
Usually, these were stories in which corporate officers 
were transferring from one part of a company to another. 
Confusien can quickly ensue when trying to link an alias 
with the correct entity in this case. (This is often true for 
the human reader, as well.) Find the three organizations 
in the following list of phrases: 
EMI Records Group, a unit of London's 
Thorn EMI PLC 
EMI Records Group North America 
EM1 Records Group 
EMI 
EMI Records 
The three organizations are: 
NAME: Thorn EMI PLC 
ALIAS: EMI 
NAME: EMI Records Group 
ALIAS: EMI Records 
NAME: EMI Records Group North 
America 
Of course, presentation f the names as a list is un- 
fair to the reader because iteliminates all context cues. 
Rules which allow the automatic system to take greater 
advantage of context cues will be developed for such 
specialized areas. 
Corporate Name Changes 
Another five missed aliases were found in scenar- 
ios of changing corporate identity. By the rules of the 
Template Element task, the old name should become the 
alias of the new name. When these scenarios went un- 
180 
recognized by the system, the names were tagged assep- 
arate ntities. The following is an example of a confus- 
ing name changing scenario which the automatic 
system missed. 
HEADLINE: Waste Management New 
Name 
Waste Management lnc. shareholders ap- 
proved changing the name of this trash 
hauling, recycling and environmental 
services concern to WMX Technologies 
Inc. 
The company's North American solid- 
waste operations will retain the name 
Waste Management Inc. 
The answer key for this scenario contains two or- 
ganization entities. 
NAME: Waste Management Inc. 
and 
NAME: Waste Management lnc. 
or 
WMX Technologies Inc. 
ALIAS: Waste Management 
WMX Technologies Inc. 
or 
Waste Management 
Waste Management Inc. 
Because there is sc~te uncertainty within the text 
as to whether the change has already taken place, the se- 
cond entity is given optional names covering both alter- 
natives. This is difficult for an automatic extraction sys- 
tem to decipher. 
Missing Name 
Many aliases are found because they are variations 
of names which have been recognized by their form 
(i.e., they contain a corporate designator - Co.) or by 
their context (e.g., CEO of Atlas). Approximately ten 
missed aliases were due to the fact that the names them- 
selves were not recotmiTed. Improvement ofname rec- 
ognition is an on-going process as the system and its de- 
velopers are exposed to more and more text. 
Incomplete Name Variation 
Name variations are generated algofthmically. 
There were only four aliases missed because they were 
not generated from the full name. Examination of the 
results has uncovered two new rules for making varia- 
tions. These will be added to the set. 
First, the abbreviation portion of the name should 
be included within an acronym, for example, ARCO as 
alias for Atlantic Richfield Company and RLA as alias 
for Rebuild L.A. 
Second, a structural member like Chamber or 
Partnership can stand alone as a variation, for example, 
Chamber as alias for Chamber of Commerce and Part- 
nership as alias for New York City Partnership. 
It should be noted that our rule packages employ 
variable bindings to collect information during the pat- 
tern matching process. In the case of name variations, 
it would be helpful to tag the pattern's structural mem- 
bers that can stand alone as variants during the rule bind- 
ing process. This can then guide the variation generator 
when that pattern has been matched. 
Unusual Firstname 
Seven PERSON aliases were missed because the 
system did not know the firstname, e.g. Clive, Vana, 
Rupert. The solution to this problem is not only to ex- 
pand the system's knowledge of human firsmames, but 
also to widen the context which can trigger human ame 
recognition. The system will be expanded to rec~ize  
as human those unknown words which are laki~g human 
roles, such as participating in family relationships. 
Performance on the Name/Alias Task 
Our system had the second highest score in orga- 
nization alias identification i  the MUC6 evaluation. 
(See the MUC6 Conference proceedings for official 
scores.) 
OF~iANIZATION ALIAS SCORE 0/1.3) 
PO6 ACT COR INC REC PRE 
170 153 110 2 65 72 
Person alias scores were suppressed by 5 points of 
recall due to an error in the gender eference code. The 
following show the original scores and those after the er- 
ror has been fixed. 
PERSON ALIAS SCORE 0/1.3) - ORIGINAL 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
170 157 146 1 86 93 
PERSON ALIAS SCORE 0/1.3) - ERROR FIXED 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
170 167 155 1 91 93 
3. DESCRIPTIVE PHRASES 
Associating an organization name with a descrip- 
tor requires resolving coroferences among names, noun 
phrases, and pronouns. Several techniques are involved 
here. Appositives, prenominals, and name-modified 
head nouns are directly associated with their respective 
181 
named entities during name recognition. After noun 
phrase recognition, those phrases which have not al- 
ready been associated with a name are compared against 
known names in the text in order to fred the correct ref- 
erent. 
Assoc ia t ion  by  Context  
During name recognition, entities are direcdy 
linked, via variable bindings within the patterns, with 
descriptive phrases that make up their context. This is 
a thrifty process because it allows the system to mine the 
very context which it has used to recognize the entity in 
the first place, thus allowing it to store linked informa- 
tion with the entity discovered. In this manner, the sys- 
tem is able to link descriptive phrases that are found in 
the following forms: 
APPOSITIVE 
MUCster Group, a New York consulting 
firm, 
PRENOMINAL 
the New York consulting firm, MUCster 
Group 
NAME-MODWIED HEAD NOUN 
the MUCster Group consulting firm 
Since the Template Element task described here 
res~ctea the descriptor slot to a single phrase, our sys- 
tem sought o choose the most reliable of all the phrases 
which had been linked to an entity. It did this by ranking 
the descriptors based on their syntactic role. The fol- 
lowing is the ranking used for the MUC6 system: 
1. appositive 
2. predicate nominative 
3. prenominal 
4. name-modified head noun 
5. longest descriptor (found by ref- 
erence) 
This ranking gives greater confidence to those des- 
criptors associated by context, with the default choice, 
the longest descriptor, having been associated by refer- 
ence .  
70% of our system's name-linked descriptors 
were associated by context. This is not surprising in 
view of our ranked selection system. The following is 
a score of the original configuration, using the ranked 
selection system. 
DESCRIPTOR SCORE 0/1.3) - ORIGINAL CONRGURATION 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
224 233 104 39 46 45 
When the ranking is abandoned and the selection 
is based on the longest descriptor alone, 62% of the re- 
sponse descriptors are drawn from those associated by 
context. This change has a deleterious effect on the 
scores for the descriptor slot and confirins our hypothe- 
sis that the context-associated descriptors are more reli- 
able. 
DESCRIPTOR SCORE 0/1.3) - LONGEST PREFERRED 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
223 233 87 53 39 37 
A surprising result of this experiment is that the 
percentage ofdescriptors associated by context is still so 
high. This is believed to be due to their predominance 
within the set of noun phrases found by our system. 
Assoc iat ion  by  Reference  
Once an organization oun phrase has been recog- 
nized, the reference resolution module seeks to find its 
referent. This process involves everal steps. First, the 
phrase is checked to mske sure it hasn't already been 
associated by context. If not, a content filter for the 
phrase is run against a content filtered version of each 
known organization name; if there is a match, the link 
is made. 
Content Filters: 
"the jewelry chain" =>(jewelry jewel chain ) 
=Smith Jewelers" =>( smith jewelers jeweler jewel ) 
For example, if the organization noun phrase, "the 
jewelry chain" is identified, its content filter would be 
applied to the list of known company names. When it 
reaches "Smith Jewelers", it will compare the falter 
against a faltered version of the name. The best match 
is considered the referent. If there is a fie, file position 
is considered as a factor, the closest name being the most 
likely referent. 
To assess the value of this filtering mechanism, the 
MUC6 evaluation corpus was processed without he ill- 
mr. The following results show that the falter did help 
the system link the correct descriptors; without it, the 
system lost five points of recall and seven points of pre- 
cision. 
DESCRIPTOR SCORE 0/1,3) - WFI'I-IOUT FILTER 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
222 235 90 48 41 38 
For genetic phrases like "the company" and for 
pronouns referring to people, reference is currently de- 
termined solely by file position and entity type. Plans 
have been formulated to increase the sophistication of 
this selection process, and to expand the system to ban- 
die coreference ofpronouns to organizations. 
182 
Named vs. Un-named Organizations 
Became of the possibility that a text may refer to 
an un-named organization by a noun phrase alone, it is 
necessary to recognize all definite and iMefmite noun 
phrases that may refer to an organization. The following 
are examples of some un-named organiTations: 
the Clinton administration 
federal appeals court 
MUCster's coreference r search group 
a New York consultancy 
its banking unit 
an arm of the MUCster unit 
Those phrases that have not already been 
associated with a named entity through context cues 
must then be associated by reference, if possible. For 
every definite noun phrase, if a reference can be found, 
it will be associated with that entity; otherwise, it will 
become an un-named entity. Every indefinite noun 
phrase that cannot be associated by context becomes an 
un-named entity. 
During the f'dtering process, the system used an 
additional heuristic to decide whether to apply a content 
filter to a noun phrase, or to make it into an un-named 
entity. If a noun phrase is found to be especially rich in 
description, it is thought o he too specific to refer to a 
previous entity, and is made into an un-named entity. 
This heuristic turned out to be detrimental to perfor- 
mance; it suppressed the descriptor scores ubstantially. 
When the original configuration (i.e. ranked selection, 
favoring appositives) is run, without this heuristic, an 
increase of four recall and three precision points is 
achieved. 
DESCRIPTOR SCORE (V1,3) - WITHOUT HEURISTIC 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
223 230 111 35 50 48 
Context vs. Reference 
The majority of descriptors reported were found 
through association by context, even when the "longest 
descriptor" selection method is used. This is partly due 
to the relative scarcity of -nattached:l organizational 
noun phrases. Sixty-eight of the 224 possible descrip- 
tors were missed because the system did not recognize 
the noun phrase as describing an organization. When 
the key's descriptive phrases were added directly to the 
system's knowledge base, as a hard-coded rule pack- 
age, to eliminate this variable, the following scores were 
produced. 
DESCRIPTOR SCORE (V1.3) - ALL NOUN PHRASES ADDED 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
230 359 135 28 59 38 
The responses scored were produced with the orig- 
inal system configuration which uses the ranked selec- 
tion system. When the system reveas to preferring the 
longest descriptor, the following scores are achieved. 
DESCRIPTOR SCORE (V1.3) - ALL NOUN PHRASES 
ADDED,LONGEST PREFERRED 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
230 366 132 3'1 57 36 
The decline in scores adds further confirmation to 
our hypothesis that the context-associated descriptors 
are more reliable. 
4, LOCATION INFORMATION 
Finally, techniques for associating an organization 
name with location information are examined. This is 
an extension of traditional coreference, but a task we do 
in many applications. Biographical information about 
a person often falls into this category, e.g. address, tele- 
phone, or passport information. The intuition is that 
location inftnmation is found frequently within descrip- 
tive noun phrases and is extractable once that link has 
been established. 
This approach was evaluated by examining the 
source of the answer key's locale fillers. It was found 
that 67% originated in appositives, prenominals, and 
post-modifiers, and 20% originated in other descriptive 
noun phrases. 
APPOSITIVE 
MUCster Group, a New York consulting 
firm, 
PRENOMINAL 
the New York consulting firm, MUCster 
Group 
POST-MODIFIERS 
MUCster Group (New York) 
MUCster Group is based in New York 
This may account for our system's superior perfor- 
mance in identifying locale/country information; our 
scores were the highest of the MUC6 participants. (See 
the MUC6 Conference proceedings for official scores.) 
We believe that this success is due to our method of col- 
lecting related information during name recognition. 
LOCALE/COUNTRY SCORE 0/1 ,.3) 
POS ACT COR INC REC PRE 
114 105 67 10 59 64 
115 102 75 2 65 74 
183 
Breaking this down further, our system found 60% 
of those kxmle fillers which originated in prenominals, 
appositives, and post-modifiers, and 57% of the other 
20%. 
5. CONCLUSION 
In the work described in this paper, our goal was 
to evaluate the contributions of various coreference r s- 
olution techniques for acquiring information associated 
with an entity. We looked at our system's perfcxlnance 
in the MUC6 Template Element evaluation in three 
areas:  
1. Name Variations 
2. Descriptive Phrases 
3. Location Information 
Name Variations 
Five areas were identified in which improvement 
to the name variation code is needed. Two areas will be 
improved by better modeling the events which may ef- 
fect organizational names, e.g. the forming of subsid- 
iaries and the changing of names. This can be extended 
to include other organizational events, such as corporate 
joint ventures. The third area. missing names, is an area 
of on-going improvement. Two new rules were identi- 
fied to help the name variation algorithm, The last area 
of improvement, person ames, can be improved on two 
fronts: 1) expanding the knowledge base of accepted 
first names, grouped by ethnic origin, and 2) better mod- 
eling frequent behaviors in which person ames partici- 
pate. The latter will be explored through automatic ac- 
quisition of person ame context over a large corpus. 
Despite the many areas for improvement that were 
identified, our system still had the second highest recall 
measure in organization alias, confirrning the basic 
soundness of our approach. 
Descriptive Phrases 
Examination of our system's performance in 
associating descriptive phrases to a referent entity 
brought us to several conclusions regarding our sys- 
tem's techniques. First, our method of directly linking 
entities to the descriptive phrases that make up their 
context via variable bindings within patterns has been 
very successful. Second, the content filter does contrib- 
ute to the effectiveness ofour coreference r solution; its 
absence caused our scores to decline. It may be im- 
proved by expanding the falter to include semantic cate- 
gories via a facility like WordNet, or through our inter- 
nal conceptual hierarchy. Third, the heuristic that 
caused the system to discard phrases that it deemed too 
specific,for resolution was extremely bad and costly to 
our performance. Fourth, our recognition of organiza- 
tional noun phrases needs improvement. This may also 
benefit from a survey of typical contexts over a large 
corpus. 
Locat ion In format ion  
Our system's uccess in identifying associated 
location information was due mainly to Our methed of 
collecting related information during name recognition, 
since 67% of the answer key's location information 
could be found within appositives, prenominals, and 
post-modifiers. As our methods of associating noun 
phrases by reference improves, our ability to associate 
location information may improve, as well. 
Overall Performance 
Ill summary, Our system has incorporated many 
new techniques for associating coreferential informa- 
tion as part of our TIPSTER research program. This pa- 
concludes that most of the techniques have been 
beneficial to our performance and suggests ways to fur- 
ther improvement. 
184 
