T IPSTER PHASE I I I  GOALS 
F. Ruth Gee 
Off ice of  Research and Deve lopment  
Washington,  D. C. 20505 
ruthg@ord.gov 
The primary goal of TIPSTER Phase III is 
to promote advancements in text processing 
technologies. To accomplish this goal, the 
TIPSTER Program will continue to encourage 
the cooperation of researchers and developers in
government, industry and academia to achieve a
balanced overall program. The Phase III 
framework is modeled on that of Phase II and 
will consist of four basic components: (1) 
Advanced Research, (2) Architecture and 
Capabilities Platform Development, (3) Metrics- 
based Evaluations and (4) Demonstration and 
Implementation Projects. 
Research Goals  
? Develop methods and algorithms to 
produce, in reasonable English, a summary 
for each document of interest or a single 
summary of multiple documents ina 
collection of interest 
? Develop the means to merge results from 
different search algorithms while 
maintaining a relevance ranking for the 
retrieved information or fuse the retrieved 
information with other items 
? Develop algorithms to resolve text 
references tosame or different entities in 
automatically extracting relationships 
among entities mentioned in a document 
? Develop effective ways for a system 
administrator  end-user to port tools and 
techniques shown to work in one language 
or domain to other languages or domains 
? Enhance multilingual capabilities for both 
retrieval and extraction 
? Improve natural language processing 
capabilities 
? Increase recall and precision 
? Improve usability testing and interface 
designs for demonstration a d 
implementation projects 
I This material has been reviewed by the CIA. That reviewl 
neither constitutes CIA authentication of information nor 
implies CIA endorsement of the author s views. 
Architecture Goals  
? Build an Architecture Capabilities Platform 
(ACP) 
? Implement architecture-compliance 
evaluation and testing procedures for the 
ACP 
? Provide ACP interoperability for software 
developers 
? Incorporate r levant industry standards 
Evaluation Goals 
? Continue to support MUC and TREC 
? Enhance the data set 
? Improve querying and scoring techniques 
? Foster"cross-pollination" of ideas between 
the two evaluation forums 
Demonstration 
Goals 
and Imp lementat ion  
Develop applications toexpand the software 
architecture 
. Apply research results to pilot systems 
? Implement robust capabilities in the 
operational environment 
? Reduce development costs and time through 
software sharing 
The TIPSTER Program sponsors have 
selected 16 projects to help meet the Phase III 
goals. Status reports for these projects and the 
other components of the program will be 
presented at the regularly scheduled TIPSTER 
workshops. These sessions will start with the 
Phase III kick-off meeting in October 1996 and 
subsequently continue at six- month intervals. 
Information about the dates and places of the 
workshops and other general program 
information can be found on the TIPSTER 
Program web site, http://www.tipster.org, as 
soon as it becomes operational. 
41 
