NameTag TM Japanese and Spanish Systems as Used for MET 
Chinatsu Aone 
Systems Research and Applications Corp. (SRA) 
4300 Fair Lakes Court 
Fairfax, VA 22033 
aonec@sra.com, h t tp : / /www.sra .com * 
1 Introduct ion 
We have participated in the Multilingual Entity Task 
(MET) for Japanese and Spanish using SRA's mul- 
tilingual text-indexing software called NameTag TM. 
Its English version was used for the Named Entity 
Task (NE) in MUC-6 \[2\]. The NameTag Japanese 
and Spanish systems were customized to accommo- 
date the MET-specific requirements and were able to 
achieve high performance in both recall and precision. 
2 MET System Descript ion 
For MET, we used NameTag in its Japanese and 
Spanish configurations. NameTag is an automated 
text indexing system that recognizes and classifies 
names and other key phrases uch as time and nu- 
meric expressions. It is an enhanced offspring, im- 
plemented in C++, of the preprocessing module of 
SRA's multilingual natural anguage processing sys- 
tem \[1\]. NameTag combines dynamic pattern recog- 
nition with static lexical ook-up to achieve high recall 
and precision at high speed. 
The NameTag engine is designed for multilingual 
capabilities. The same engine is used for different lan- 
guages using language-specific "plug-ins" such as to- 
kenizers, patterns, lexical data, alias generators, mor- 
phological analyzers, and segmenters. Table 1 com- 
pares plug-ins used for different languages/tasks. 
NameTag has several unique features beside being 
able to handle multiple languages. First, it can gen- 
erate and link aliases of names automatically using 
language-specific alias generators. For example, the 
Spanish system can recognize "Pefia" as an alias for 
"Josd Francisco Pefia Gdmez" by generating a pater- 
nal name alone. The Japanese system currently per- 
forms a limited organization alias recognition such as 
*I'd llke to thank Mila Ramos-Santacruz and Misa Miyaclfi, 
who assisted me with manual tagging of development texts and 
lexical development for Spanish and Japanese respectively, and 
Kevin Hausman, who is the principal developer ofthe C++ 
NameTag engine. 
Tokenizer 
Patterns 
Lexical data 
Alias generator 
Morph analyzer 
Segmenter 
Jp MET Sp MET Eg MUC-6 
Y 
y 
Y 
Y 
optional 
n 
Table 1: NameTag configurations 
"DAIWA" as an alias for "DAIWABANK." 
Second, SRA's Japanese segmenter, which uses a 
large lexicon, morphological nalysis, and heuristic- 
based rules to segment a sentence into words, is fully 
integrated into the NameTag engine. Thus, the sys- 
tem can utilize the results of name recognition i  the 
subsequent segmentation process and increase seg- 
mentation accuracy. 
Third, NameTag can take advantage of SGML 
markers to improve performance. For MET, head- 
lines (marked by <SLUG> or <HL>) were processed 
after the main body of text (marked by <TXT>). 
This was advantageous forJapanese because any en- 
tity recognized in the main body was utilized in seg- 
mentation of headlines. It also increased precision for 
Spanish because only lexicon and alias lookups were 
applied to all-upper-case h adlines, avoiding spurious 
or erroneous names generated by patterns. 
Finally, NameTag provides a GUI-based multilin- 
gual development environment which facilitates rapid 
development ofpatterns. 
3 MET Results and Analysis 
The MET final blind tests were conducted using 100 
Kyodo articles for Japanese and 100 AFP articles for 
Spanish. These articles were retrieved using the key- 
word "press conference." Thus, they encompassed 
various ubject domains, including business, politics, 
sports, and arts, unlike the Wall Street Journal arti- 
463 
cles used for MUC-6. In addition, the MET guide- 
lines had additional requirements not found in MUC- 
6, such as tagging of relative dates and tagging orga- 
nizations as locations when they are used as facilities. 
Despite the differences in types of articles and the 
additional requirements, the NameTag Japanese and 
Spanish systems achieved high performance in both 
recall and precision. The Japanese system is slower 
(15MB/h on a SPARC 20) than its Spanish and En- 
glish counterparts (93 MB/h and 80 MB/h respec- 
tively) because of the segmentation overhead. Both 
the Japanese and Spanish systems till have room for 
higher recall because of shorter development time but 
also partly because of difficult language-specific issues 
to be solved, which we will discuss below. 
3.1 Japanese-specific Issues 
The MET evaluation has revealed several Japanese- 
specific challenges which must be solved in order 
for the system to achieve even higher performance. 
First, we have encountered what we call chicken- 
and-egg problems. Good name recognition requires 
good segmentation, asname recognition patterns rely 
on properties of words segmented by the segmenter 
such as part-of-speech and other linguistic attributes. 
However, good segmentation, in turn, relies on good 
name recognition, as names are usually not in the 
lexicons and thus tend to cause segmentation errors. 
As discussed in Section 2, NameTag can utilize the 
results of name recognition in subsequent segmenta- 
tion to partially solve this problem. Additionally, it 
is essential that the segmenter be more robust and 
accurate in order to improve performance on name 
recognition and other Japanese text processing tasks 
even further. 
Another chicken-and-egg problem was encountered 
in constructions where a person name and an orga- 
nization name appear next to each other in a sen- 
tence and there is no delimiter between the two 
(e.g. "ABCDEFG" where ABC is a person name and 
DEFG an organization ame with no space or other 
punctuation in-between.) Here, recognizing the per- 
son name requires recognizing the adjacent organi- 
zation name first while recognizing the organization 
name requires recognizing the person name first. In 
these cases, the system often mistags the whole string 
as a person and misses the organization ame. 
The second big challenge is dealing with Japanese 
aliases, which are more complex than English aliases. 
The NameTag Japanese system currently generates 
aliases like "SILICONGRAPHICS" for "SILICON- 
GRAPHICSCORP." by stripping off certain corpo- 
rate designators at the end of names. But it does 
not currently generate an alias which is a charac- 
ter subsequence of its full name like "NIKKOU" for 
"N__IHONKOUKUU." Since aliases are, by definition, 
already recognized as names in a given article, they 
often appear in contexts where patterns do not ap- 
ply. In these cases, not generating aliases results in 
missing names (i.e., loss in recall). 
3.2 Spanish-specific Issues 
In addition to the general differences between MET 
and the MUC-6 NE task described earlier, there were 
a few Spanish-specific ssues which had to be tackled 
for MET. 
In the MET Spanish articles, the capitalization 
convention was rather unpredictable (e.g., "Ofic- 
ina de lucha contra la droga," "puerto cubano de 
Mariel"). Thus, capitalization clue was not as rel- 
evant in Spanish MET texts as English WSJ texts in 
recognizing proper names. Consequently, the Span- 
ish system needed to perform deeper analysis of the 
texts to achieve comparable results. 
The presence of "de" in Spanish person names has 
made person name recognition more difficult, as "de" 
is also a preposition, and sometimes caused a Spanish 
version of chicken-and-egg problem. For example, the 
system thought "Valle Rivas" in "Olijela del Valle 
Rivas" was a location as "valle" also means "valley." 
On the other hand, it tagged "Roverto Marquevich 
de San Isidro" as a full person name though "de" is 
a preposition and "San Isidro" is a location name. 
4 Summary  
The MET evaluation has proved that NameTag can 
be ported to other languages with a level of perfor- 
mance similar to English, despite various language- 
specific challenges. We plan to port it to other un- 
segmented languages such as Chinese and Thai in ad- 
dition to other European languages. 
References  
\[1\] 
\[2\] 
Chinatsu Aone, Sharon Flank, Paul Krause, 
and Doug McKee. SRA: Description of the 
SOLOMON System as Used for MUC-5. In Pro- 
ceedings of Fourth Message Understanding Con- 
ference (MUC-5), 1993. 
George Krupka. SRA: Description of the SRA 
System as Used for MUC-6. In Proceedings of
Sixth Message Understanding Conference (MUC- 
6), 1995. 
464 
