AN INTERPRETATIVE DATA ANALYSIS OF CHINESE NAMED ENTITY 
SUBTYPES 
Thomas A. Keenan 
Department of  Defense, 
9800 Savage Road, 
Fort Meade,  Md. 20755 
tomkeena@romulus.ncsc.mi l  
1. MOTIVAT IONS FOR AN INTERPRE-  
TAT IVE  DATA ANALYS IS  
"In assessing the performance of information extraction 
systems, we are interested in knowing the classes of 
errors made and the circumstances in which they are 
made."\[1\] However, to date the Tipster scoring cate- 
gories (correct, partial, incorrect, spurious, missing, 
and noncommittal) have not been applied to classes of 
data based on structural distinctions in the language, or 
on semantic subclasses more finely differentiated than 
the NE types (person, location, organization, time, date, 
money, and percent). For example, there has been no 
attempt to score the extraction of transliterated foreign 
person ames, or of short-form aliases of corporation 
names, or of Julian dates as opposed to Gregorian dates 
as opposed to dates of the Chinese lunar calendar. 
There are obvious practical reasons for this. The scot- 
hag criteria re limited to those that can be measured 
without access to anything more than the annotations 
the systems generate \[2\], and those applied by human 
taggers to the answer keys. Moreover, any new annota- 
tions that might become available represent a limited 
subset of the infinite number of ways that NE data 
might be subcategorized, in accordance with particular 
interests, applications, and capabilities. 
Yet, from among these innumerable possible subcatego- 
ties of entity names, afew would seem likely to emerge 
as more well-motivated than the rest. Note that an 
appendix on "VIP Names" or "Country and Capital City 
Names" is more likely to appear in a desk-top dictio- 
nary than a list called "Ethnic Surnames in their Native 
Scripts and Common Anglicized English Renderings." 
One would expect observant end-users of information 
extraction systems to notice rather quickly that certain 
high frequency, hard-to-get, or thematically significant 
categories of names are missing or incorrect in the out- 
put. And one might desire, at some point in the system 
development loop, to capture these observations system- 
atically, so as to direct efforts at system improvement. 
This would be especially desirable if system develop- 
meat includes relatively labor-intensive linguistic anal- 
ysis. 
Doing this "systematically" is not the same as measur- 
ing errors scientifically. To count he number of tagged 
VIP person ames, for example, presupposes some- 
body's interpretation f whether "VIP" includes only 
chiefs-of-state, or chiefs-of-state and cabinet ministers, 
or these plus nobel prize winning scientists, novelists, 
peace activists, etc. So, the following observations are 
at best an interpretative error analysis, informed by 
knowledge of the language and of likely user expecta- 
tions. However, we try to define this as a series of steps 
that reasonably approximates a cientific discovery pro- 
cedure. 
2. A PROCEDURE FOR INTERPRETA-  
T IVE  DATA ANALYS IS  
The following steps were taken to analyze the MET Chi- 
nese test data. 
- Step I: Scan the Input Data for Salient Subtypes 
The MET Chinese named-entity data tagged in the test 
keys was scanned for sub-classes ofnames appearing to 
meet one or more of the following criteria: 
- they are frequently-occurring semantic subtypes (for 
example itwas apparent that country names comprised a 
large subclass within the LOCATION-tagged ata); 
- they are readily listable, high-interest ubtypes (for 
example, "chiefs-of-state" comprise aclass small 
enongh to be readily listable by a human analyst; in 
addition, we might expect their activities to be more 
newsworthy than those of the newspaper reporters or 
official government spokespersons whose names also 
appear frequently in the data). 
453 
- they are readily patternable subtypes (for example, 
many taggable organization names begin with a location 
name and end with a unit designator, as in the name 
"Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Corporation". 
Other organization names, such as "Hamas," had no 
obviously specifiable morphological features in com- 
mon with large numbers of other names. 
This scanning process identified asmall number of data 
subtypes, which were individually describable in terms 
of the meaning, forms or distributions ofnames, and 
which collectively seemed to comprise alarge percent- 
age of all names extracted \[3\]. The resulting inventory 
of subtypes can be thought of as an hypothesis that he 
NE data is describable in a certain interpretative y t sys- 
tematic way. 
- Step 2: Count NE Occurrences by Subtype 
Tagged names were searched by NE "type" (person / 
location / organization) using a concordance tool 
(NMSU's "XConcord"), then copied to files represent- 
ing each of the posited subtype classes, or to a catch-all 
"residual" class. The number of names in each file was 
then counted to arrive at an overall profile of the data 
distribution. This step can be thought of as a test of the 
data distribution hypothesis. 
- Step 3: Chart the Distribution of NE Data 
Table 1 (following the tex0 provides asummary of the 
"test" results. 
- Step 4: Check for Inconsistencies in the Data Dis- 
tribution 
The numbers in the boxes of Table 1 were tallied and 
analyzed for internal consistency and non-conformity to 
our original expectations, that is, to show that he 
"hypothesis" was not invalidated. If no inconsistencies 
were found and an acceptably high percentage of the 
data had been accounted for, then the descriptive cate- 
gory set might have appeared adequate. Note, however, 
that he ratio of "residual" person ames, 40%, is con- 
siderably higher than the ratios of residual location and 
organization names. This suggested that he initial 
description was leaving a significant portion of the data 
unaccounted for. 
- Step 5: Loop Back to Step 1 (or stop when an 
acceptably high percentage of the data is accounted 
for, and inconsistencies are resolved) 
Re-examination f the data revealed that, among the 2-3 
syllable, non-VIE "residual" person 
names, 40% \[4\] are directly preceded on the left by a 
"title" (e.g. "Representative so-and-so"). This still 
leaves 24% \[5\] of person ames unaccounted for. Some 
high percentage of this 24% presumably could be 
accounted for by an adequate structural description of 
Chinese "surname pins given name" patterns. This 
description, and measurement of he data it would cover, 
was not attempted, ue to time constraints and the com- 
plexity of the problem. 
3. APPL ICAT IONS OF  THE INTERPRE-  
TAT IVE  DATA ANALYS IS  
As suggested above, variations of the above procedure 
can be used to generate profiles of the data in order to 
direct efforts at system improvement. This may or may 
not be worth the cost of analysis if system improvement 
is driven solely by pipingmore and more massive 
amounts of development data into a statistical learning 
engine. If sufficiently massive and varied development 
data is available, presumably the system eventually will 
train upon something approaching all of the relevant 
data subtypes, without any need to know and describe 
what those subtypes are. However, when the approach 
involves labor-intensive pattern development based on 
linguistic structures, future language-analytic develop- 
ment could be focused by applying in advance some- 
thing like the foregoing procedure, supported by 
tailored versions of concordance tools and other on-line 
analytic aids. 
4. FOR FURTHER ANALYS IS  
Under what circumstances would this approach be use- 
ful? Above it was observed, "we are interested in
knowing the classes of errors made and the circum- 
stances in which they are made." We might also be 
interested inknowing the significance of different 
classes of errors, or of data correctly handled compared 
to data incorrectly handled. Apparently only a small 
percentage of taggable NE's fall into the "residual" sub- 
classes (see Table 1), and these tend to correspond to 
data that is "hard to get" for the MET participants \[6\]. 
Although the percentage may seem small, the signifi- 
454 
cance of a 10% or even 5% error rate ultimately depends 
on the usefulness of the unexploited data to the end-user. 
If"hard-m-getY "residual;' low-frequency data tends to 
correspond to certain semantic subclasses and not oth- 
ers, then the possibility arises that hese classes of NE's 
assume some non-random thematic significance inthe 
texts. That is, obscure, low-frequency proper names (or 
names not conforming to prevailing patterns and types) 
might be expected to crop up in newspaper texts only 
when they become highly newsworthy, and yet be pre- 
cisely the kinds of names that some systems tend to 
miss. It remain~ for further analysis to test and measure 
for these possibilities by observing system perfor- 
mances on specific subclasses of data selected for tex- 
tual significance. 
5. REFERENCES 
\[1\] Sundheim, Beth M. "Tipster/MUC-5 
Information Extraction System Evaluation" 
in Proceedings of the Tioster Text Program 
w 
(Phase D, p. 149. September 1993. Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. San Francisco. 
~\] i~d. 
\[3\] Zipf's Law predicts that a relatively small 
number of high-frequency words will 
account for a disproportionately large num- 
ber of token occurrences in a text corpus. A 
similar generalization appears to govern 
language patterns as well as words, that is, a 
small number of high-frequency patterns 
apparently can account for a disproportion- 
ately large share of types uch as organiTa- 
fion names, with the specification ofnew 
patterns eventually reaching a point of ever- 
diminishing returns. 
\[4\] i.e. 40% X 40% = 16% of all person ames 
\[5\] 40% - 16% 
\[6\] This finding is based on the author's pre- 
liminary, unpublished analysis. In general, 
MET participant programs appear to be 
most successful in tagging subclasses of
data covered under the "listable" colnmn of 
the following chart, and least successful 
against the "residtml" subclasses. 
All NE's: 3100 "LISTABLE"s "PATIERNABLE"s "RESIDUAL" 
All LOC's: 
1700 (50%) 
All ORG's: 
700 (25%) 
All PER's: 
700 (25%) 
unabbreviated Country/ 
Major City Names: 
80% of LOCs (45% of 
NEs) 
Major International & 
Chinese ORGs: 
35% of ORGs (10% of 
NEs) 
VIPs (Chiefs of State, 
etc.): 
15% of all PERs (5% of 
NEs) 
abbreviated Country/ 
Major City 
nanles: 
15% of LOCs (10% of 
NEs) 
LOC... "UNIT" pattern: 
50% of ORGs a (10% of 
NEs) 
3+ syllable non-VIP for- 
eign PERs: 
40% of PERs (10% of 
NEs) 
2-3 syl., non-VIPs, 
bound by punctuation 
& "said": 
5% of PERs 
(-0% of NEs) 
"obscure" LOCs 
(not country/major city 
names)." 
5% of LOCs (-0% of 
NEs) 
other not readily pat- 
ternable ORGs: 
5% of ORGs (-0% of 
NEs) 
2-3 syl., non-VlP, 
"unbound" PERs: 
<40% of PERs (10% of 
NEs)* 
* about40% of the above 
category are bound on 
the left by a "title" (e.g. 
"Representative so-and- 
SO') 
TOTAL  60% "listable" 30% "pattemable" 10% "residual" 
Table 1: Chinese NE Data Distribution (figures rounded to nearest 5%) 
a. Approximately 10% of all ORGs appear to fall into small istable/pattemable classes not indicated 
455 
