SRA PROJECT FOR ARPA / USACOM 
David Oppenheimer 
SRA International, Inc. 
4300 Fair Lakes Court 
Fairfax, VA 22033 
david_oppenheimer@sra.com 
(703) 803-2412 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The USACOM project is part of the larger 
SAIC/BBN Advanced Joint Planning (AJP) 
Advanced Concepts Technology Demonstration 
(ACTD). The primary objective of the project is to 
demonstrate the effectiveness of Tipster-sponsored 
data extraction technologies. Although this project is 
just now getting underway, we plan to investigate he 
applicability of data extraction technologies in a 
number of scenarios, including: 
Improved accuracy of text filtering 
based on integrating natural- 
language based extraction with 
detection (text retrieval) 
Using data extraction technology to 
automatically categorize incoming 
texts into predelrmed folders 
Integrated structured information 
extracted from texts as an 
additional source of input o the 
planning process 
Enabling the collection of 
aggregate information derived from 
texts for information presentation 
Methods of displaying text to focus 
on area of interest explicitly 
I I .  NAMETAG OVERVIEW 
NameTag consists of a software ngine that applies 
name recognition rules to text, supported by lexical 
resources and limited lists of proper names. Users 
implement an application driver that invokes the 
engine and configures the processing. NameTag can 
either generate a document that has the names 
annotated with SGML (Standardized Generalized 
Markup Language), or provide a table of the names 
with indices (offsets) to the text -- "annotation" 
mode. A name recognition rule consists of a pattern 
and an action. The pattern is similar to a regular 
expression and consists of special operators and 
operands that match portions of text. Typically, 
patters recognize structural or contextual indicators 
of names and thus perform dynamic recognition. 
The action performs operations on the text, such as 
tagging aname with a classification. The rules are 
partitioned to form processing phases that primarily 
recognize one class of name. For example, NameTag 
has separate phases for recognizing personal names 
and organizational names. This feature allows for the 
recognition of certain classes of names to impact he 
recognition of other names. The lexical resources 
contain information about words, such as their part- 
of-speech and their meaning. 
I I I .  PROJECT PLANS 
This project will integrate with two community- 
developed reference architectures. These are the 
Joint Task Force (JTF) Reference Architecture and 
the Tipster Architecture. With respect to the JTF 
Reference Architecture, SRA's core data extraction 
product (NameTag) will be integrated into the 
Generic Server layer, with a customized data 
extraction prototype integrated into the Application 
Layer. With respect to the Tipster Architecture, a 
Tipster-compliant version of NameTag will be used. 
Additional portions of the developing architecture 
will be evaluated for the appropriateness of insertion 
into the demonstration (for example, the document 
manager or text annotator). The entire project will be 
evaluated by the Tipster Engineering Review Board 
(ERB) for documentation a d certification as 
appropriate. 
107 
