THE MULTILINGUAL ENTITY TASK 
A DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF ENAMEX IN SPANISH 
Don D. Anderson 
Department of Defense 
Fort George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000 
dondande@romulus.ncsc.mil 
(301) 688-6149 
1. Introduction. The task involved identifying and 
typing all named entity expressions (ENAMEX), 
numerical entity expressions (NUMEX), and temporal 
entity expressions (TIMEX) in Spanish news articles. 
The analysis of the data suggests hat focusing on the 
high frequency expressions results in a higher payoff. 
This report looks primarily at ENAMEX expressions 
because they accounted for nearly three-quarters of the 
taggable data, and because they involved some of the 
more difficult tagging decisions. 
Since ENAMEX accounts for so many of the tagga- 
ble expressions, it makes ense that one can maximize 
performance by perfecting ENAMEX identification. A 
sample analysis of test results for recall (REC) illus- 
trates how this works. REC, in this context, is the num- 
ber of correct ags divided by the number of possible 
tags. In the test results, the average REC for NUMEX 
expressions was 91, that for TIMEX expressions 94, 
while that for ENAMEX was 88. These scores repre- 
sent he average of all the participants' cores for correct 
tags divided by the total possible tags. Similarly, the 
total overall REC for all taggable xpressions -- 89.6 -- 
would be found by dividing the total correct ags -- 
2,977 -- by the total possible tags -- 3,320. On the other 
hand, ff ENAMEX identification were improved enough 
to obtain a REC of 93 with no change in NUMEX and 
TIMEX RECs, then the overall average REC would 
jump to 94.8, an increase of roughly 5 percentage 
points. The example shows that a relatively small 
improvement in an area that accounts for a large per- 
centage of the data (73%+ in the case of ENAMEX for 
Spanish) will result in a relatively large overall improve- 
ment. If the improvement had been only in NUMEX 
(which accounts for only about 9% of the overall data), 
for example, the overall improvement would have been 
almost negligible. 
2. LOCATION data. ENAMEX expressions con- 
sisted of three types: LOCATION, PERSON, and 
ORGANIZATION. The analysis of the Spanish data 
showed that close to half (43%) of ENAMEX were 
LOCATION. A closer, more detailed, look at the 
LOCATION data suggests that he high payoff indicated 
by the average REC and precision (PRE) scores was 
achieved because most of the data were listable. Over 
three-quarters (76%) of the LOCATION type entities 
were country aggregates, countries, or capital cities. 
The list of these names is fairly small -- around 400 -- 
and is comprised of the 187 independent country names 
with their capital cities plus about 20-30 country aggre- 
gate names. States, provinces, and major cities 
accounted for 9% of the LOCATION data. When these 
names are added, the list is still relatively small but now 
accounts for about 85% of the LOCATION data in the 
corpus. Some of the remaining 15% of the LOCATION 
data is pattemable asit contains key words such as cerro 
'hill', rio 'fiver', provincia 'province', and lago 'lake'. 
The following examples are fairly representative of 
LOCATION data: 
? Aggregates, countries, capital cities 
(1) America Latina 'Latin America' 
(2) Alemania 'Germany' 
(3) Mosctl 'Moscow' 
? States, provinces, major cities 
(1) Nueva York 'New York' 
(2) laprovincia de Rfo Negro 'the province of Black 
River 
(3) Ginebra 'Geneva' 
? Other 
(1) la banda de Gaza 'the Gaza strip' 
(2) la Casa Blanca 'the White House' 
(3) el cerro San Cristtbal 'San Cfisttbal hill' 
It is interesting to note that a simple list of the Span- 
ish equivalents of the country aggregates, countries, and 
457 
major dries is not sufficient to account for all the 
listable LOCATION data. The news articles also con- 
tained country abbreviations such as EEUU (Estados 
Unidos 'United States'), EAU (Emiratos Arabes Unidos 
'United Arab ~mirates'), and GB (Gran Bretaaa 'Great 
Britain') 
3. PERSON data. High REC and PRE scores were 
achieved in this area beecause the data were either 
listable or patternable. Since the corpus is made up of 
news articles, it is not surprising that chiefs of state and 
members of governent account for 37% of the PERSON 
data. The other categones include known figures from 
fields such as sports, entertainment, the military, and 
religion. 
Although less than 10% of PERSON names 
appeared with a title, around 30% were preceded or fol- 
lowed by an explanatory phrase regarding the profession 
or nationality of the person amed. Thus, to a certain 
extent hey are patternable. A large majority of names, 
on the other hand, must be identified by means of a list. 
As would be expected, many of these names will 
include alternate short forms. Thus, for example, all ref- 
erences to Salmon Rushdie after the first one are simply 
Rushdie in the Spanish news article about he novelist. 
The following are representative examples of PER- 
SON names in the corpus: 
Chiefs of state and members of governement 
(1) el presidente francds Jacques Chirac 
'the French president Jacques Chirac' 
(2) el presidente uruguayo Luis Alberto Lacalle 
'the Uruguayan president Luis Alberto Lacalle' 
(3) el Secretario de Trabajo Robert Reich 
'the Secretary of Labor Robert Reich' 
Other names 
(1) el escritor brit6nico de origen indio Salmon 
Rushdie 
'the British writor of Indian origin Salmon Rush- 
die' 
(2) el l\[der ebelde angoleao Jonas Savimbi 
'the Angolan rebel eader Jonas Savimbi' 
(3) la actriz francesa Carole Bouquet 
'the French actress Carole Bouquet' 
4. ORGANIZATION data. Acronyms or acronym- 
like names accounted for 57% of the ORGANIZATION 
data. Another 27% occurred with some kind of organi- 
zational designator and were therefore patternable, 
while the remaining 16% were listable. The average 
REC and PRE scores for ORGANIZATION data were 
about 8 points lower than those for PERSON and 
LOCATION. While these scores do not necessarily 
mean that the systems had problems with acronyms, it
seems logical to start focusing development energies 
here because acronyms account for such a high percent- 
age of the data. 
At first glance, it appears that the high percentage of
acronyms coupled with their complexity will present a
real challenge to the developer. 
The problem with acronyms and acronym-like 
names is how to determine whether or not a word is an 
acronym. Acronyms in the Spanish data ressemble 
English acronyms and are of at least hree different 
types: (1) the first letters of key words in the ORGANI- 
ZATION name (such as AFA, the A sociaci6n del F_utb6l 
Argentino); (2) the initial syllables of key words or a 
mixture of first letters and initial syllables (such as 
MINUHA, Misi6n de la ONU en Haitf 'United Nations 
mission in Haiti'); or (3) ad hoc (such as G7, where the 
G stands for grupo and 7 for siete in grupo de siete 
pa\[ses m6s industrializados 
Compounding the problem are foreign loan acro- 
nyms such as NLRB (National Labor Relations Board) 
and acronyms that are never expanded in the article -- 
such as AFP (Agence France Presse). 
Closer analysis hows that virtually all acronyms are 
of the ORGANIZATION type. Furthermore, nearly all 
acronyms are in uppercase and so are fairly easy to iden- 
tify. Abbreviations such as EEUU, EAU, and GB men- 
rioned previously can be filtered out and once the 
acronym is identified, an attempt can be made to match 
it to an occurrence in the all uppercase header area com- 
mon to all the news articles. 
Over a quarter of the ORGAN/ZATION names are 
pattemable toa degree since they include an organiza- 
tional designator such as banco 'bank', grupo 'group',  
organizac/6n 'organization', and asociaci6n 'associa- 
tion'. The problem is that even though the majority of 
ORGANIZATION names with desi?nators occurred 
with the designator in initial position, it is not clear how 
to identify where the organi~arional name ends. The fol- 
lowing examples will illustrate: 
(1) Banco Mundial 
(2) banco First Albany 
(3) Comitd de Familiares de Detenidos Desapareci- 
dos 
458 
(4) Comit? nacional de la lucha contra las epi- 
demias de Kikwit 
(5) Organizaci6n de Cooperaci6n y Desarrollo 
Econ6mico 
(6)Organizaci6n Mundial de la Salud 
5. Summary. In s~jmmary, the analysis of the Span- 
ish data shows that as a general rule, most of the 
ENAMEX occurrences are listablc or easily identifiable 
by non-linguistic means. Identification ofpattemable 
ENAMEX is, on the other hand, not straightforward due 
to the difiqculty of determining precise patterns. Com- 
parison of this analysis with average REC and PRE 
scores uggests that here is a correlation between high 
scores and a high frequency of occurrence of data that 
arc mostly listable or easily determined by means of 
well-defined patterns. 
459 
