Project Underl ine - A Government Perspective 
Michael J. Chrzanowski 
Depar tment  o f  Defense 
9800 Savage Road, Fort  Meade,  MD 20755 
mjchrza@ romulus.ncsc.mi l  
(301) 688-9131 
The purpose of the TIPSTER contract with Carn- 
egie Group, Inc. (CGI) of Pittsburgh, PA is to promote 
and further develop automatic Text Summarization 
using a Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) metric to 
generate summaries of documents hat are directly rele- 
vant to the information eed of an individual user. CGI 
subcontracts with Carnegie Mellon University to per- 
form most of its linguistic research. 
CGI extended the MMR metric and its use in re- 
ranking documents and subdocuments according to the 
combined criteria of query relevance and maximal novel 
information from previously selected ocuments or sub- 
documents. MMR refinement included: 1) parametric 
analysis, 2) testing in the context of a functioning named 
IR system, and 3) modification or extension of the met- 
ric as appropriate. CGI also adapted the MMR metric 
to support sub-document MMR ranking, where the sub- 
documents are all parts of one source document. Finally, 
CGI provided two prototypes of the MMR-based text 
summarization system.: a developmental prototype and 
an operational prototype. 
The developmental prototype (Scout DP-1) pro- 
vided the ability to query using specific free text or 
another document, provided a list of documents meet- 
ing that query from the IR system, and summarized doc- 
uments linking the selected sentences back to the 
original text. The delivery of the operational prototype 
(Scout OP-1) in late August 1998 which extended the 
capabilities of DP-1, improved the user interface and 
added a keyword in context index feature offered the 
first real opportunity for end users to interact with the 
automatic text summarization system and provide com- 
ment. 
Carnegie Group Inc. participated in both the dry run 
and SUMMAC evaluations. CGI's performance was 
encouraging and relied not only on the MMR metric but 
on traditional sentence selection methods, such as, 
always select he first sentence of a document. 
The MMR metric has proven to be extremely flexi- 
ble and has application in many facets of retrieval and 
summarization. MMR is expected to prove most useful 
in the summarization fmultiple documents. 
35 
