1	examples of using nlp and ie in question answering include shallow parsing , deep parsing , and ie . 
9	who, where or how much and eventually one of the question concepts, when the stem is ambiguous , as described in . 
5	2 question answering based on ie we use a qa system supported by increasingly sophisticated levels of ie . 
2	assuming that it is very likely that the answer is a named entity, describes a ne-supported q&a system that functions quite well when the expected answer type is one of the categories covered by the ne recognizer. 
11	it is worth noticing that in our experiment, the structural support used for answer-point identification only checks the binary links involving the asking point and the candidate answer points, instead of full template matching as proposed in . 
7	if the expected answer types are typical named entities, information extraction engines are used to extract candidate answers. 
13	examples of the use of nlp and ie in question answering include shallow parsing , semantic parsing , named entity tagging and high-level ie . 
3	high performance qa systems . 
12	typically qa is supported by natural language processing and ie . 
10	in response, factoid question answering systems have evolved into two types: • use-knowledge: extract query words from the input question, perform ir against the source corpus, possibly segment resulting documents, identify a set of segments containing likely answers, apply a set of heuristics that each consults a different source of knowledge to score each candidate, rank them, and select the best . 
8	this shallow approach parallels work in question answering . 
6	qa is different than search engines in two aspects: instead of a string of keyword search terms, the query is a natural language question, necessitating question parsing, instead of a list of documents or urls, a list of candidate answers at phrase level or sentence level are expected to be returned in response to a query, hence the need for text processing beyond keyword indexing, typically supported by natural language processing and information extraction . 
4	to find the answer to a question several steps must be taken, as reported in : a2 first, the question semantics needs to be captured. 
