6	depending on the chosen task, such systems either generate single-sentence “headlines” for multi-sentence text , or they provide a sentence condensation module designed for combination with sentence extraction systems . 
1	ziff-davis corpus most previous work has relied on automatically constructed parallel corpora for training and evaluation purposes. 
3	for example, jing trained her system on a set of 500 sentences from the benton foundation and their reduced forms written by humans. 
9	the evaluation of sentence reduction for details) used a corpus of 500 sentences and their reduced forms in human-written abstracts. 
5	jing was perhaps the first to tackle the sentence compression problem. 
11	dependency structure, we cannot use complex methods for text reduction as described, e.g., in . 
8	our constraints are linguistically and semantically motivated in a similar fashion to the grammar checking component of jing . 
17	to overcome this problem, linguistic parsing and generation systems are used in the sentence condensation approaches of knight and marcu and jing . 
4	jing proposes a novel algorithm for sentence reduction that takes into account different sources of information to decide whether or not to remove a particular component from a sentence to be included in a summary. 
10	in contrast to jing , the bulk of the research on sentence compression relies exclusively on corpus data for modelling the compression process without recourse to extensive knowledge sources . 
12	many algorithms exploit parallel corpora to learn the correspondences between long and short sentences in a supervised manner, typically using a rich feature space induced from parse trees. 
14	in addition, an automatic evaluation method based on context-free deletion decisions has been proposed by jing . 
13	since then, jing , riezler et al and knight and marcu have explored statistical models for sentence shortening that, in addition, aim at ensuring grammaticality of the shortened sentences. 
16	examples include text summarisation , subtitle generation from spoken transcripts and information retrieval . 
7	sentence reduction the task of the sentence reduction module, described in detail in , is to remove extraneous phrases from extracted sentences. 
2	jing and mckeown and jing propose a cut-and-paste strategy as a computational process of automatic abstracting and a sentence reduction strategy to produce concise sentences. 
18	between these two extremes, there has been a relatively modest amount of work in sentence simplification and document compression in which words, phrases, and sentences are selected in an extraction process. 
15	 studied a new method to remove extraneous phrase from sentences by using multiple source of knowledge to decide which phrase in the sentences can be removed. 
19	sentence simplification systems are capable of compressing long sentences by deleting unimportant words and phrases. 
