17	we implemented the algorithm described in with the addition of a cutoff, such that the topic signatures for a term are only included if the p1/p2 for that term is greater than the mean p1/p2 over all terms. 
15	this is similar to the idea of topic signature introduced in . 
14	2.2 automatically retrieved topic signatures topic signatures are word vectors related to a particular topic . 
3	the notion of topic signatures was first introduced in . 
9	to identify these terms,weusethelog-likelihoodstatisticsuggested by dunning and first used in summarization by lin and hovy . 
12	this is an extension of lin's method . 
5	to date, researchers have harvested, with varying success, several resources, including concept lists , topic signatures , facts , and word similarity lists . 
11	in order to generate quabs automatically, documents identified from ferret's automatic q/a system are first submitted to a topic representation module, which computes both topic signatures and enhanced topic signatures in order to identify a set of topic-relevant passages. 
7	while used topic signatures (lin and hovy, 2000; scenario description the customer has commissioned a research project looking at the impact of the outsourcing of american jobs on the united states’ relationship with india. 
4	these n-gram key concepts are called topic signatures . 
19	2 general summarization model many summarization systems ) include two levels of analysis: the sentence level, where every textual unit is scored according to c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 t1 1 1 0 1 1 t2 1 0 0 1 0 t3 0 1 0 0 1 t4 1 0 1 1 1 table 1: matrix for summarization model the concepts or features it covers, and the text level, where, before being added to the final output, textual units are compared to each other on the basis of those features. 
16	other systems exploit the co-occurrence of particular concepts or syntactic constraints between concepts . 
2	to deal with a lot of chinese documents which have free style of writing and flexible themes, a sentence-extraction summarization method created by detecting thematic areas is tried following such work as . 
13	a topic signature, as described in , is a list of terms that can be used to signal the membership of a text in the relevant topic or category. 
1	these are essentially scripts that provide information that is very useful in general reasoning as well as reasoning for nlp . 
18	sembled, topic signatures are computed which identify the set of topic-relevant concepts and relations between concepts that are found in the relevant set of documents. 
8	under this approach, topic representations like those introduced in and are used to identify a set of text passages that are relevant to a user's domain of interest. 
10	using these sets we obtained a set of topic signatures for the spanish geography domain and another set of ts for the non-spanish geography domain. 
6	two methods are used: topic signature : a topic signature is a family of related terms {topic, signature}, where topic is the target concept and signature is a vecto related s. 
