6	szpektor et al applies a similar, with no seed lists, to extract automatically entailment relationships between verbs, and etzioni et al report very good results extracting named entities and relationships from the web. 
11	these retrieved text fragments are then considered good candidate for paraphrasing x bought y. anchor-based learning methods have been used to investigate many semantic relations ranging from very general ones as the isa relation in to very specific ones as in where paraphrases of question-answer pairs are searched in the web or as in where a method to scan the web for searching textual entailment prototype relations is presented. 
4	the tease algorithm is an unsupervised method for acquiring entailment relations from the web for a given input template. 
7	such transformations are typically denoted as paraphrases in the literature, where a wealth of methods for their automatic acquisition were proposed . 
9	many recent efforts have also focused on extracting binary semantic relations between entities, such as entailments , is-a , part-of , and other relations. 
5	szpektor et al automatically identify anchors in web corpus data. 
3	the task of verb entailment acquisition appears to have much in common with that of paraphrase acquisition , , . 
12	szpektor et al measured yieldù, the number of correct rules learned for an input re1see the 3rd iwp workshop for a sample of recent works on paraphrasing . 
1	next, we implemented a prototype that utilizes a state-of-the-art method for learning entailment relations from the web , the minipar dependency parser and a syntactic matching module. 
8	we then incorporate paraphrase similarity within the lexical similarity model by allowing, for some unaligned node h ‚àà ph, where t ‚àà pt: sim = max ,score ) 38 our approach to paraphrase detection is most similar to the te/ase algorithm , and bears similarity to both dirt and knowitall . 
2	many recent efforts have also focused on extracting semantic relations between entities, such as entailments , is-a , part-of , and other relations. 
10	taking a stepfurther, the tease algorithm provides a completely unsupervised method for acquiring entailment relations from the web for a given input relation . 
