13	phrase pairs are extracted by following the method described in where all contiguous phrase pairs having consistent alignments are extraction candidates. 
8	first, we describe the addition of two new features to the chinese model, in a manner similar to that of och et al ; then we describe how we scaled the system up to a much larger training set. 
26	phrase-based models are good at learning local translations that are pairs of sub-strings, but often insufficient in modeling the reorderings of phrases themselves, especially between language pairs with very different word-order. 
42	the spmt models outperform a state of the art phrase-based baseline model by 2.64 bleu points on the nist 2003 chinese-english test corpus and 0.28 points on a humanbased quality metric that ranks translations on a scale from 1 to 5. 1 introduction during the last four years, various implementations and extentions to phrase-based statistical models have led to significant increases in machine translation accuracy. 
17	we obtain the word alignments using the method of koehn et al , which is based on that of och and ney . 
3	the phrase learning approach in takes two alignments: a source-to-target alignment a180 a10 and a target-to-source alignment a180 a178 . 
21	above the phrase level, these models typically have a simple distortion model that reorders phrases independently of their content , or not at all . 
49	unless otherwise noted, the following discussion is generally applicable to alignment template systems as well. 
38	recent work in statistical machine translation has sought to overcome the limitations of phrasebased models by making use of syntactic information. 
28	different models have been presented in the literature, see for instance . 
39	here we refer to bilingual phrase as the bilingual phrases used by och and ney . 
6	nonetheless, attempts to incorporate richer linguistic features have generally met with little success . 
16	we compare our syntax-based system against an implementation of the alignment template approach to mt , which is widely considered to represent the state of the art in the field. 
40	most current smt systems use a generative model for word alignment such as the freely available giza++ , an implementation of the ibm alignment models . 
31	phrase-based statistical machine translation systems analyze large quantities of bilingual parallel texts in order to learn translational alignments between pairs of words and phrases in two languages . 
44	language models , are too weak to help a phrase-based decoder reorder the target phrases into grammatical outputs. 
23	limitations of basic word-based models prompted researchers to exploit morphological and/or syntactic/phrasal structure , lee, , yamada and knight , marcu and wong , och and ney ,koehn et al , among others.) 
47	first, many-to-many word alignments are induced by running a one-to-many word alignment model, such as giza++ , in both directions and by combining the results based on a heuristic . 
27	translation including the joint probability phrasebased model and a variant on the alignment template approach , and contrast them to the performance of the word-based ibm model 4 . 
29	an aligned phrase pair is consistent with the word alignment if neither phrase contains any word aligning to a word outside the other phrase . 
12	phrase-based statistical machine translation systems analyze large quantities of bilingual parallel texts in order to learn translational alignments between pairs of words and phrases in two languages . 
25	the current state of the art is represented by the so-called phrase-based translation approach . 
15	anotherpromisingprospectofourmodelseems to lie in its ability to handle non-contiguous phrases, a feature that state of the art systems such as do not incorporate. 
1	defining scms the work presented here was done in the context of phrase-based mt . 
20	to do this, we first identify initial phrase pairs using the same criterion as previous systems : definition 1. 
32	phrase pairs are extracted by following the method described in where all contiguous phrase pairs having consistent alignments are extraction candidates. 
14	an empirical evaluation against a state-of-the-art smt system similar to indicates positive prospects. 
35	one is distortion model which penalizes translations according to their jump distance instead of their content. 
22	the problem of coverage in smt statistical machine translation made considerable advances in translation quality with the introduction of phrase-based translation . 
34	in view of content-independency of the distortion and flat reordering models, several researchers proposed a more powerful model called lexicalized reordering model that is phrase dependent. 
33	baseline mt system: alignment templates our baseline mt system is the alignment template system described in detail by och, tillmann, and ney and och and ney . 
19	a lexicalized phrase-reordering model like that in use in isi's system might be able to learn a better reordering, but simpler distortion models will probably not. 
18	the alignment template translation model and related phrase-based models advanced the previous state of the art by moving from words to phrases as the basic unit of translation. 
5	a common approach to phrase-based smt is to learn phrasal translation pairs from word-aligned training data . 
4	the decoding algorithm shown here is most similar to the decoding algorithms presented in and , the later being used for the alignment template model for smt. 
2	 defines the notion of consistency for the set of phrasal translations that are learned from wordfigure 3: following the definition in eq. 
45	given a sentence pair and a corresponding word alignment, phrases are extracted following the criterion in och and ney . 
24	we also compare the top result of our synchronous binarization system with the state-of-theart alignment-template approach . 
43	words of parallel chinese-english data released by ldc, in order to train several statistical-based mt systems: pbmt, a strong state of the art phrase-based system that implements the alignment template model ; this is the system isi has used in the 2004 and 2005 nist evaluations. 
48	in addition, we added three feature functions to restrict reorderings and to represent globalized insertion/deletion of words: • lexicalized reordering feature function scores whether a phrase translation pair is monotonically translated or not : hlex = log kproductdisplay k=1 pr where δk = 1 iff ¯ak − ¯ak−1 = 1 otherwise δk = 0. 
37	synchronous binarization for mt machine translation has made very good progress in recent times, especially, the so-called “phrasebased” statistical systems . 
11	nowadays, most of the state-of-the-art smt systems are based on bilingual phrases . 
41	the phrase-based-like submodels have been proved useful in phrase-based approaches to smt . 
10	a detailed analysis will be given for two of them; the so-called alignment template system , and the phrase-based translation system described in section 2.2 . 
46	standard phrase-based translation systems use a word distance-based reordering model in which non-monotonic phrase alignment is penalized based on the word distance between successively translated source phrases without considering the orientation of the phrase alignment or the identities of the source and target phrases . 
36	among these models, the basic ones are a translation model pr and a target language model pr , which can be complemented by reordering models , word penalty to avoid favoring short sentences, class-based target-language models, etc . 
7	unfortunately, recent work has shown that applying statistical parsers to ungrammatical mt output is unreliable at best, with the parser often assigning unreasonable probabilities and incongruent structure . 
30	obviously, the npa is a special case of the phrase extractor in in that it considers only one phrase alignment rather than all possible ones. 
9	for algorithms whose packed representations are graphs, such as hidden markov models and other nitestate methods, ratnaparkhi’s mxparse parser , and many stack-based machine translation decoders , the k-best paths problem is well-studied in both pure algorithmic context and for surveys) and nlp/speech community . 
