12	the approach presented here has some resemblance to the bracketing transduction grammars of , which have been applied to a phrase-based machine translation system in . 
6	our approach to phrase-table smoothing contrasts to previous work in which smoothed phrase probabilities are constructed from word-pair probabilities and combined in a log-linear model with an unsmoothed phrase-table. 
21	we define the source and target projection of a hypothesis h by the proj operator which collects in order the words of a hypothesis along one language: projf = braceleftbig fp : p‚ààuniontextui=1{jin}n‚àà bracerightbig proje = braceleftbig ep : p‚ààuniontextui=1{lim}m‚àà bracerightbig if we denote by hf the set of hypotheses that have f as a source projection ‚â° f}), then our translation engine seeks ÀÜe = proje where: ÀÜh = argmax h‚ààhf s the function we seek to maximize s is a loglinear combination of 9 components, and might be better understood as the numerator of a maximum entropy model popular in several statistical mt systems . 
11	we use a state-of-the-art phrase-based translation system including the following models: an n-gram language model, a phrase translation model and a word-based lexicon model. 
18	 describe a noisy-orù combination: p = 1‚àíp ‚âà 1‚àí Àúiproductdisplay i=1 ) where ¬Øsj is the probability that sj is not in the translation of Àút, and p is a lexical probability. 
7	nowadays, most of the state-of-the-art smt systems are based on bilingual phrases . 
16	this is the traditional approach for glass-box smoothing . 
8	for the confidence measures which will be introduced in section 5, we use a state-of-the-art phrasebased approach as described in . 
1	we thus propose to adapt the statistical machine translation model for sms text normalization. 
3	finally, we use pos features to parameterize a distortion model in a limited distortion decoder . 
13	we extended the monotone search algorithm from such that reorderings are possible. 
9	today's statistical machine translation systems rely on high quality phrase translation pairs to acquire state-of-the-art performance, see . 
20	more details about the baseline system can be found in . 
23	more details about the baseline system can be found in . 
15	as described above, and use two different variants of glass-box smoothing over the phrasetable, and combine the resulting estimates with pure relativefrequency ones in a loglinear model. 
5	there is, however, a large body of work using morphological analysis to define cluster-based translation models similar to ours but in a supervised manner , . 
17	 obtain p from smoothed relative-frequency estimates in a wordaligned corpus. 
22	recently, various works have improved the quality of statistical machine translation systems by using phrase translation . 
4	we use a state-of-the-art phrase-based translation system as described in . 
19	several strategies to compute these probabilities have been proposed , but none of them takes into account the fact that, when it comes to translation, many different inflected forms of words share the same translation. 
10	above the phrase level, these models typically have a simple distortion model that reorders phrases independently of their content , or not at all . 
2	we experimented with two levels of distortion: monotonic, where the phrasal alignment is monotonic and limited distortion, where only adjacent phrases are allowed to exchange positions . 
14	we use a phrase-based translation approach as described in . 
