18	question answering has emerged as a key area in natural language processing to apply question parsing, information extraction, summarization, and language generation techniques . 
22	mann and fleischman et al used part of speech patterns to extract a subset of hyponym relations involing proper nouns. 
11	3.2 questions and corpus to get a clear picture of the impact of using different information extraction methods for the offline construction of knowledge bases, similarly to , we focused only on questions about persons, taken from the trec8 through trec 2003 question sets. 
26	we propose to study and develop several kernel methods that can operate in support vector machines for determining the optimal strategies and compare the results with the maximum entropy combinations reported in . 
1	after that, several million instances of people, locations, and other facts were added . 
13	the precision of the extracted information can be improved significantly by using machine learning methods to filter out noise . 
17	this approach is similar in spirit to the work reported by fleischman et al and mann , except that our system benefits from a greater variety of patterns and answers a broader range of questions. 
24	we do not use particular lexicosyntactic patterns, as previous attempts have . 
19	fleischman et al focus on the precision of the information extracted using simple part-of-speech patterns. 
20	in particular, we use the name/instance lists described by and available on fleischman's web page to generate features between names and nominals . 
3	there have been several approaches to automatically discovering lexico-semantic information from text . 
16	the recall problem is usually addressed by increasing the amount of text data for extraction ) or by developing more surface patterns . 
10	the row labelled precision shows the precision of the extracted information estimated by random sampling and manual evaluation of 1% of the data for each table, similar to . 
27	hyponymy relations can play a crucial role in various nlp systems, and there have been many attempts to develop automatic methods to acquire hyponymy relations from text corpora . 
14	data fleischman et al describe a dataset of concept-instance pairs extracted automatically from a very large corpus of newspaper articles. 
4	we compared our system with the concepts in wordnet and fleischman et al's instance/concept relations . 
7	another direction we are pursuing is the use of machine learning techniques to learn predictors of good nuggets, much like the work of fleischman et al . 
23	definition questions following fleischman et al , we select the 50 definition questions from the trec2003 question set. 
21	this confirms the results of fleischman et al : shallow methods may benefit significantly from the post-processing. 
12	in contrast, the idea of bootstrapping for relation and information extraction was first proposed in , and successfully applied to the construction of semantic lexicons , named entity recognition , extraction of binary relations , and acquisition of structured data for tasks such as question answering . 
5	in recent years, learning components have started to permeate question answering . 
8	mann and fleischman et al used part of speech patterns to extract a subset of hyponym relations involving proper nouns. 
6	 also propose a supervised algorithm that uses part of speech patterns and a large corpus to extract semantic relations for who-is type questions. 
15	some of these patterns are similar to the ones discovered by hearst while other patterns are similar to the ones used by fleischman et al . 
2	in our future work we plan to investigate the effect of more sophisticated and, probably, more accurate filtering methods on the qa results. 
25	at the same time, research efforts in data acquisition promise to deliver increasingly larger question-answer datasets . 
9	the experimental results are presented in section 4. we discuss related issues and future work in section 5. 2 related work question answering has attracted much attention from the areas of natural language processing, information retrieval and data mining . 
