33	however, in the source-channel approach to machine translation, we need to combine probabilities from the translation model with the language model , which has been shown to be very important for translation quality . 
1	synchronous context-free grammars several definitions for synchronous context-free grammars have been proposed in the literature; see for instance . 
38	both yamada and knight and chiang use scfgs as the underlying model, so their translation schemata are syntax-directed as in fig. 
43	analogous techniques for tree-structured translation models involve either allowing each nonterminal to generate both terminals and other nonterminals , or, given a constraining parse tree, to “flatten” it . 
55	some approaches have used syntax at the core while others have integrated syntax into existing phrase-based frameworks . 
48	these features are very common in state-of-the-art systems and λs are weights of features. 
12	we also implemented algorithms 2 and 3 in a parsing-based mt decoder and report results on decoding speed. 
19	while the state-of-the-art hierarchical smt system performs well despite stringent constraints imposed on its context-free grammar, we believe its main advantage lies in its ability to extract hierarchical rules across phrasal boundaries. 
39	besides, our model, as being linguistically motivated, is also more expressive than the formally syntax-based models of chiang and wu . 
34	in making one nonterminal play dual roles, we follow the de nitions in , originally known as syntax directed translation schema . 
8	chiang reported significant performance improvements in chinese-english translation as compared with pharaoh, a state-of-the-art phrase-based system . 
52	so i co-developed several fast and exact algorithms for kbest parsing in the general framework of directed monotonic hypergraphs . 
6	1a notable exception to this kind of approach is chiang who introduces syntactic information into phrase-based smt via hierarchical phrases rather than by external parsing. 
59	the spmt models are similar to the models proposed by chiang and galley et al . 
9	in this paper, we discuss a new hierarchical phrase-based statistical machine translation system , presenting recent extensions to the original proposal, new evaluation results in a community-wide evaluation, and a novel technique for fine-grained comparative analysis of mt systems. 
64	given a fixed length limit, the number of surface phrases extracted from any sentence pair of length n where all words are uniquely aligned is o , but the number of treelets is potentially exponential in the number of children; and the number of rules with two gaps extracted by chiang is potentially o . 
16	in our experiments, we apply the algorithms to the lexicalized pcfg parser of bikel , which is very similar to collins’ model 2 , and to a synchronous cfg based machine translation system . 
51	many researchers have explored syntax-based methods, for instance, wu and chiang both uses binary-branching synchronous context-free grammars . 
17	synchronous parsing has seen a surge of interest recently in the machine translation community as a way of formalizing syntax-based translation models . 
61	the other is a hierarchical phrase-based translation in which translation is realized as a set of paired production rules . 
37	so instead of determinization, here we present a simple-yet-effective extension to the algorithm 3 of huang and chiang that guarantees to output unique translated strings: • keep a hash-table of unique strings at each vertex in the hypergraph • when asking for the next-best derivation of a vertex, keep asking until we get a new string, and then add it into the hash-table this method should work in general for any equivalence relation that can be defined on derivations. 
20	similarly to , the rules discussed in this paper are equivalent to productions of synchronous tree substitution grammars. 
40	in contrast, their decodings are reported to be computationally expensive and chiang uses aggressive pruning to make it tractable. 
4	another example of this framework is the hierarchical model of chiang . 
28	while error-driven training techniques are commonly used to improve the performance of phrasebased translation systems , this paper presents a novel block sequence translation approach to smt that is similar to sequential natural language annotation problems 727 such as part-of-speech tagging or shallow parsing, both in modeling and parameter training. 
25	therefore, after annotating the initial rules from the current training sentence pair, we adhere to to recursively generalize each existing rule; however, we abstract on a per-sentence basis. 
41	additionally, we incorporate the pruning techniques used in , by which any hypothesis with a probability lower than times the highest probability for one sentence is discarded. 
58	and syntax-inspired formal models , in spite of being trained on significantly less data, have shown promising results when compared on the same test sets with mature phrase-based systems. 
45	although it is possible to estimate phrases directly from a training corpus , most phrase-based mt systems start with a word alignment and extract phrases that are consistent with the given alignment. 
7	chiang introduces hiero, a hierarchical phrase-based model for statistical machine translation. 
50	these algorithms have been re-implemented by other researchers in the field, including eugene charniak for his n-best parser, ryan mcdonald for his dependency parser , microsoft research nlp group for a similar model, jonathan graehl for the isi syntax-based mt decoder, david a. smith for the dyna language , 223 and jonathan may for isi’s tree automata package tiburon. 
57	we used the n-best list generated by the hiero smt system . 
49	when tested on top of two state-of-the-art systems, the collins/bikel parser and chiang’s cky-based hiero decoder , this algorithm is shown to have very little overhead even for quite large k (see fig. 
32	one way around this difficulty is to stipulate that all rules must be binary from the outset, as in inversion-transduction grammar and the binary synchronous context-free grammar employed by the hiero system to model the hierarchical phrases. 
63	recent research into syntax-based smt has produced promising results in addressing some of the problems; research motivated by other statistical models has helped to address others . 
54	table 1 shows the tats extracted from the tsa in figure 3 with h = 2 and c = 2. as we restrict that t must be a subtree of t , tats may be treated as syntactic hierarchical phrase pairs with tree structure on the source side. 
3	in the future, we plan to explore our discriminative framework on a full distortion model or even a hierarchical model . 
36	synchronous grammar formalisms that are capable of modeling such complex relationships while maintaining the context-free property in each language have been proposed for many years, , but have not been scaled to large corpora and long sentences until recently. 
62	in the hierarchical phrase-based model, production rules are accumulated by computing “holes” for extracted contiguous phrases 
60	 proposes an heuristic way of acquiring context free transfer rules that significantly improves upon a standard phrase-based model. 
18	complete mrs are then formed by combining these nl substrings and their translations under a parsing framework called the synchronous cfg , which forms the basis of most existing statistical syntax-based translation models . 
42	chiang has recently shown significant improvements in translation accuracy, using synchronous grammars. 
47	another smart reordering model was proposed by chiang . 
14	mt decoder our second experiment was on a cky-based decoder for a machine translation system , implemented in python 2.4 accelerated with psyco 1.3 . 
22	 generates synchronous context-free grammar rules from an existing phrase translation table. 
5	the first approach is to reuse the components of a generative model, but tune their relative weights in a discriminative fashion . 
27	pos-based features, syntactic or hierarchical features . 
15	we have presented here a general-purpose algorithm for k-best parsing and applied it to two state-of-the-art, large-scale nlp systems: bikel’s implementation of collins lexicalized pcfg model and chiang’s synchronous cfg based decoder for machine translation. 
35	as illustrated in figure 2, vpp-vp has contiguous spans on both source and target sides, so that we can generate a binary-branching scfg: s→ np v pp-vp , np v pp-vp vpp-vp → vp pp , pp vp in this case m-gram integrated decoding can be done in o ) time which is much lowerorder polynomial and no longer depends on rule size , allowing the search to be much faster and more accurate facing pruning, as is evidenced in the hiero system of chiang where he restricts the hierarchical phrases to be a binary scfg. 
46	from this point, our decoder is similar to the work by chiang . 
29	clearly the bleu scores are quite low; we are planning to perform experiments on arabic using a more advanced translation system, such as hiero . 
53	chiang presents a hierarchical phrase-based model that uses hierarchical phrase pairs, which are formally productions of a synchronous context-free grammar. 
23	baseline pharaoh with phrases extracted from ibm model 4 training with maximum phrase length 7 and extraction method ‘diag-growthfinal’ • lex phrase-decoder simulation: using only the initial lexical rules from the phrase table, all with lhs x, the glue rule, and a binary reordering rule with its own reordering-feature • xcat all nonterminals merged into a single x nonterminal: simulation of the system hiero . 
44	in recent years, phrase-based systems have been shown to outperform word-based mt systems; therefore,inthispaper,weuseapublicly-available phrase-based mt system, pharaoh , to investigate the impact of different alignments. 
10	3.2 scaling up training chiang reports on experiments in chineseenglish translation using a model trained on 7.2m+9.2m 
24	recent work in machine translation has evolved from the traditional word and phrase based models to include hierarchical phrase models and bilingual synchronous grammars . 
56	variations of scfgs go back to aho and ullman 's syntax-directed translation schemata, but also include the inversion transduction grammars in wu , which restrict grammar rules to be binary, the synchronous grammars in chiang , which use only a single nonterminal symbol, and the multitext grammars in melamed , which allow independent rewriting, as well as other tree-based models such as yamada and knight and galley et al . 
31	several recent syntax-based models for machine translation can be seen as instances of the general framework of synchronous grammars and tree transducers. 
65	hierarchical phrases recent work in the use of hierarchical phrases improves the ability to capture linguistic generalizations, and also removes the limitation to contiguous phrases. 
21	we believe it will be beneficial to account for this finding in future work in syntax-based smt and in efforts to improve upon . 
11	the work reported in this paper extends the original treatment of hiero by evaluating an improved version in a community-wide exercise for chinese-english and arabic-english translation, and by introducing a novel analysis technique for comparing mt systems’ output. 
13	similarly, chiang uses the k-best parsing algorithm described below in a cfg-based log-linear translation model in order to learn feature weights which maximize bleu. 
2	the compositional bi-phrase feature function hcomp: this is introduced to compensate for 1 recent work from chiang addresses similar concerns to those motivating our work by introducing a synchronous cfg for bi-phrases. 
30	to find such groups of morphemes and functional words, we applied a sequence of morpheme groupings by extracting frequently occuring n-grams of morphemes as follows : in a series of iterations, we obtained high-frequency bigrams from the morphemic representation of parallel texts, of either morphemes, or of previously such identified morpheme groups and neighboring morphemes until up to four morphemes or one root 3 morpheme could be combined. 
26	while uses only two nonterminal symbols in his grammar, we introduce multiple syntactic categories, taking advantage of a target language parser for this information. 
