18	it allows us to distinguish the degree of importance between sentences, providing a more flexible model for evaluating sentence utility . 
5	in centroid-based summarization , the sentences that contain more words from the centroid of the cluster are considered as central. 
19	figure 7 summaries recall and precision a utility-based evaluation was also used to obtain more intuitive results than those given by precision and recall using the methods reported in . 
8	a straightforward approach for approximating sentence fusion can be found in the use of sentence extraction for multidocument summarization . 
16	sentence extraction techniques , on the other hand, compute a score for each sentence based on certain features and output the most highly ranked sentences. 
14	relative utility relative utility is tested on a large corpus for the first time in this project. 
2	co-selection measures include precision and recall of co-selected sentences, relative utility , and kappa . 
6	a common approach is to measure similarity between all pairs of sentences and then use clustering to identify themes of common information . 
13	other research rewards passages that include topic words, that is, words that have been determined to correlate well with the topic of interest to the user or with the general theme of the source text . 
27	the first of these, relative utility allows model summaries to consist of sentences with variable ranking. 
11	however, this experiment differs from prior work in that we use judges to determine the relevance of sentences to sub-events rather than to evaluate summaries . 
25	we find that extrinsic, task-oriented evaluation method to be most easily automated, and quantifiable . 
9	other commonly used measures include kappa and relative utility , both of which take into account the performance of a summarizer that randomly picks passages from the original document to produce an extract. 
15	a number of techniques for choosing the right sentences to extract have been proposed in the literature, ranging from word counts , key phrases , naive bayesian classification , lexical chains , topic signatures and cluster centroids . 
22	this is in contrast with a method proposed by radev , where the centroid of a cluster is selected as the representative one. 
28	we observed the best results with maximal marginal relevance reranker and the default reranker of the system based on cross-sentence informational sub-sumption . 
1	on the other hand, redundancy can be exploited to identify important and accurate information for applications such as summarization and question answering . 
24	evaluation methods we use the relative utility method to compare our various summaries. 
4	as in , in order to create an extract of a certain length, we simply extract the top scoring sentences that add up to that length. 
3	but the interpretation of the results is not simple; studies 404 computational linguistics volume 28, number 4 show how the same summaries receive different scores under different measures or when compared to different ideal summaries created by humans. 
12	mead is a publicly available toolkit for multi-document summarization . 
21	for details see . 
26	the mead summarizer the mead summarizer is based on sentence extraction and uses a linear combination of three features to rank the sentences in the source documents. 
23	inspired by rst, endeavored to establish a cross-document structure theory that is more appropriate for mds. 
20	first, our method focuses on subject shift of the documents from the target event rather than the sets of documents from different events . 
17	mead : mead is a centroid-based extractive summarizer that scores sentences based on sentence-level and inter-sentence features which indicate the quality of the sentence as a summary sentence. 
7	among text summarization techniques, there are statistical methods and linguistic methods . 
10	topic-oriented multi-document summarization has already been studied in other evaluation initiatives which provide testbeds to compare alternative approaches . 
