14	we also used the following resources: the charniak parser to carry out the syntactic analysis; the wn::similaritypackage to compute the jiang-conrath distance needed to implement the lexical similarity siml as defined in ; svm-lighttk to encode the basic tree kernel function, kt , in svm-light . 
13	first, as observed in the lexical-based distance kernel kl shows an accuracy significantly higher than the random baseline, i.e. 
11	in line with many other researches ), we determine these anchors using different similarity or relatedness dectors: the exact matching between tokens or lemmas, a similarity between tokens based on their edit distance, the derivationally related form relation and the verb entailment relation in wordnet, and, finally, a wordnet-based similarity . 
4	third, the dramatic improvement observed in on the dataset “train:d1-test:t1” is given by the idf rather than the use of the j-c similarity . 
16	the system performance reported in ), which is among the best we are aware of, is also included for comparison. 
15	it has already been applied in this way by corley & mihalcea and wu . 
2	also, we will try different similarity score functions for both the clustering and the anchor approaches, as those surveyed in corley and mihalcea . 
6	the wn::similarity package to compute the jiang&conrath distance as in . 
3	in line with , we define it as: s1 = summationdisplay ∈a simw ×idf summationdisplay wh∈wh idf where idf is the inverse document frequency of the word w. 
10	table 1: experimental results lexical similarity siml as defined in . 
9	a first class of methods defines measures of the distance or similarity between t and h either assuming the independence between words in a bag-of-word fashion or exploiting syntactic interpretations . 
7	second, we can use one of the wordnet similarities indicated with d ) and different relation between words such as the lexical entailment between verbs and derivationally relation between words . 
5	although these implications are uncontroversial, their automatic recognition is complex if we rely on models based on lexical distance between hypothesis and text, e.g., . 
17	pr systems that can be broadly categorized as ir-based include . 
12	then, we use this cross-pair similarity with more traditional intra-pair similarities ) to define a novel kernel function. 
1	﻿ ) applied or utilized lexical based word overlap measures. 
8	our approach is in line with many other researches ). 
